Postscript of David Bentley Hart bible translation



Postscript 

A Note on the Prologue of John’s Gospel 

An Exemplary Case of the Untranslatable 

There may perhaps be no passage in the New Testament more resistant 
to simple translation into another tongue than the first eighteen 
verses—the prologue—of the Gospel of John. Whether it was written 
by the same author as most of the rest of the text (and there is cause 
for some doubt on that score), it very elegantly proposes a theology of 
the person of Christ that seems to subtend the entire book, and that 
perhaps reaches its most perfect expression in its twentieth chapter. 
But it also, intentionally in all likelihood, leaves certain aspects of that 
theology open to question, almost as if inviting the reader to venture 
deeper into the text to find the proper answers. Yet many of these fruitful 
ambiguities are simply invisible anywhere except in the Greek of 
the original, and even there are discernible in only the most elusive 
and tantalizing ways. Take, for example, the standard rendering of just 
the first three verses. In Greek, they read, 1Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ 
ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος· 2οὗτος ἦν ἐν ἀρχῇ 
πρὸς τὸν θεόν· 3πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο 
οὐδὲ ἓν ὃ γέγονεν· (1En archēi ēn ho logos, kai ho logos ēn pros ton theon, kai 
theos ēn ho logos; 2houtos ēn en archēi pros ton theon; 3panta di’ avtou egeneto, 
kai chōris avtou egeneto oude hen ho gegonen.) I am aware of no respectable 
English translation in which these verses do not appear in more or 

533 


less the same form they are given in the King James Version: “1In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God. 2The same was in the beginning with God. 3All things were 
made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.” 
Read thus, the Gospel begins with an enigmatic name for Christ, asserts 
that he was “with God” in the beginning, and then unambiguously 
goes on to identify him both as “God” and as the creator of all 
things. Apart from that curiously bland and impenetrable designation 
“the Word,” the whole passage looks like a fairly straightforward statement 
of Trinitarian dogma (or at least two-thirds of it), of the Nicene-
Constantinopolitan variety. The average reader would never guess that, 
in the fourth century, those same verses were employed by all parties in 
the Trinitarian debates in support of very disparate positions, or that 
Arians and Eunomians and other opponents of the Nicene settlement 
interpreted them as evidence against the coequality of God the Father 
and the divine Son. The truth is that, in Greek, and in the context 
of late antique Hellenistic metaphysics, the language of the Gospel’s 
prologue is nowhere near so lucid and unequivocal as the translations 
make it seem. For one thing, the term logos really had, by the time the 
Gospel was written, acquired a metaphysical significance that “Word” 
cannot possibly convey; and in places like Alexandria it had acquired a 
very particular religious significance as well. For the Hellenistic Jewish 
philosopher Philo, for instance, it referred to a kind of “secondary 
divinity,” a mediating principle standing between God the Most High 
and creation. In late antiquity it was assumed widely, in pagan, Jewish, 
and Christian circles, that God in his full transcendence did not come 
into direct contact with the world of limited and mutable things, and 
so had expressed himself in a subordinate and economically “reduced” 
form “through whom” (δι᾽ αὐτοῦ [di’ avtou]) he created and governed 
the world. It was this Logos that many Jews and Christians believed to 
be the subject of all the divine theophanies of Hebrew scripture. Many 
of the early Christian apologists thought of God’s Logos as having been 
generated just prior to creation, in order to act as God’s artisan of, and 


archregent in, the created order. Moreover, the Greek of John’s prologue 
may reflect what was, at the time of its composition, a standard 
semantic distinction between the articular and inarticular (or arthrous 
and anarthrous) forms of the word theos: the former, ὁ θεός (ho theos) (as 
in πρὸς τὸν θεόν [pros ton theon], where the accusative form of article 
and noun follow the preposition), was generally used to refer to God 
in the fullest and most proper sense: God Most High, the transcendent 
One; the latter, however, θεός (theos) (as in καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος [kai 
theos ēn ho logos]), could be used of any divine being, however finite: a 
god or a derivative divine agency, say, or even a divinized mortal. And 
so early theologians differed greatly in their interpretation of that very 
small but very significantly absent monosyllable. Now it may be that the 
article is omitted in the latter case simply because the word theos functions 
as a predicate there, and typically in Greek the predicate would 
need no article. Yet this rule tends not to hold when the predication 
is one of personal identity; moreover, the syntax is ambiguous as regards 
which substantive should be regarded as the subject and which the 
predicate; though Greek is an inflected language, and hence more syntactically 
malleable than modern Western tongues, the order of words 
is not a matter of complete indifference; and one might even translate 
καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος as “and [this] god was the Logos.” But the issue 
becomes at once both clearer and more inadjudicable at verse 18, where 
again the designation of the Son is theos without the article, and there 
the word is unquestionably the subject of the sentence. Mind you, in 
the first chapter of John there are also other instances of the inarticular 
form where it is not clear whether the reference is the Father, the 
Son, or somehow both at once in an intentionally indeterminate way 
(as though, perhaps, the distinction of articular from inarticular forms 
is necessary in regard to the inner divine life, but not when speaking of 
the relation of the divine to the created realm). But, in all subsequent 
verses and chapters, God in his full transcendence is always ho theos; and 
the crucial importance of the difference between this and the inarticular 
theos is especially evident at 10:34–36. Most important of all, this 


distinction imbues the conclusion of the twentieth chapter with a remarkable 
theological significance, for it is there that Christ, now risen 
from the dead, is explicitly addressed as ho theos (by the apostle Thomas). 
Even this startling profession, admittedly, left considerable room for argument 
in the early centuries as to whether the fully divine designation 
was something conferred upon Christ only after the resurrection, and 
then perhaps only honorifically, or whether instead it was an eternal 
truth about Christ that had been made manifest by the resurrection. 

Anyway, my point is not that there is anything amiss in the theology 
of Nicaea, or anything that the original Greek text calls into question, 
but only that standard translations make it impossible for readers who 
know neither Greek nor the history of late antique metaphysics and 
theology to understand either what the original text says or what it does 
not say. Not that there is any perfectly satisfactory way of representing 
the text’s obscurities in English, since we do not distinguish between articular 
and inarticular forms in the same way; rather, we have to rely on 
orthography and typography, using the difference between an uppercase 
or lowercase g to indicate the distinction between God and [a] god. 
This, hesitantly, is how I deal with the distinction in my translation of 
the Gospel’s prologue, and I believe one must employ some such device: 
it seems to me that the withholding of the full revelation of Christ 
as ho theos, God in the fullest sense, until Thomas confesses him as such 
in the light of Easter, must be seen as an intentional authorial tactic. 
Some other scholars have chosen to render the inarticular form of theos 
as “a divine being,” but this seems wrong to me on two counts: first, if 
that were all the evangelist were saying, he could have used the perfectly 
serviceable Greek word theios; and, second, the text clearly means to 
assert some kind of continuity of divinity between God the Father and 
the Logos, not merely some sort of association between “God proper” 
and “a divine being.” Here, I take it, one may regard chapter twenty as 
providing the ultimate interpretation of chapter one, and allow one’s 
translation to reflect that. 


Translating Certain Words 

An Irregular Glossary 

In order to avoid misunderstandings or, worse, a surfeit of long 
and repetitious footnotes, I thought it best to explain my renderings of 
certain words here for the curious. In some cases my choice of translation—
or, in one case, my refusal of a choice of translation—might seem 
somewhat eccentric, or even perhaps a little perverse; but I can honestly 
say that all my decisions have been made in good faith and on what 
I consider the soundest principles. I have also allowed my thinking on 
certain terms to be shaped by—in addition to the studies of many modern 
biblical scholars—the readings offered by certain ancient authorities 
who, to my mind, possessed at once all the necessary attributes of trustworthy 
exegetical guides: complete linguistic proficiency, penetrating 
exegetical insight, and genuinely redoubtable theological powers: Origen, 
Gregory of Nyssa, and Theodore of Mopsuestia (among others). 

1. The first word is αἰώνιος (aiōnios), which in most traditional 
translations is rendered as “eternal” or “everlasting,” except in the many 
instances where such a reading would be nonsensical. And I have discovered 
that there are many Christians whose sometimes furious objection 
to any other rendering revolves around a single verse, Matthew 25: 
46. After all, in the original Greek of the New Testament, there really 
are only three verses that seem to threaten “eternal punishment” for 
the wicked (though, in fact, none of them actually does), and many who 
are doctrinally or emotionally committed to the idea of eternal torment 
for the unelect would feel gravely bereaved if the delicious clarity of 
the seemingly most explicit of those verses were allowed to be obscured 
behind a haze of lexical indeterminacy. To these I can say only that, if 
they really wish to believe in the everlasting torment of the reprobate, 
they are perfectly free to do so, whether there is any absolutely unquestionable 
scriptural warrant for doing so or not; but, then again, even 
the Greek word typically rendered as “punishment” in that verse raises 
problems of translation (see below, and see my footnote to Matthew 25: 

46). More to the point, there are three immense difficulties that militate 
against the traditional rendering of aiōnios in the New Testament. 

The first is that there is a genuine ambiguity in the term in Greek 
that is impossible to render directly in an English equivalent. Aiōnios is 
an adjective drawn from the substantive αἰών (aiōn, or aeon), which can 
sometimes mean a period of endless duration, but which more properly, 
throughout the whole of ancient and late antique Greek literature, 
means “an age,” or “a long period of time” of indeterminate duration, 
or even just “a substantial interval.” Its proper equivalent in Latin would 
be aevum. At times, it can refer to an historical epoch, to a time “long 
past” or “far in the future,” to something as shadowy and fleeting as the 
lifespan of a single person (in Homer and the Attic dramatists this is 
its typical meaning), or even to a considerably shorter period than that 
(say, a year). It can also, as it frequently does in the New Testament, 
refer to a particular universal dispensation: either the present world 
or the world to come or a heavenly sphere of reality beyond our own. 
Moreover, the adjective aiōnios, unlike the adjective ἀΐδιος (aïdios) or 
adverb ἀεί (aei), never clearly means “eternal” or “everlasting” in any 
incontrovertible sense, nor does the noun aiōn simply mean “eternity” 
in the way that the noun ἀϊδιότης (aïdiotēs) does; neither does aiōnios 
mean “endless,” as ἀτέλευτος (atelevtos) or ἀτελεύτητος (atelevtētos) 
does; and, in fact, there are enough instances in the New Testament 
where the adjective or the noun obviously does not mean “eternal” or 
“eternity” that it seems to me unwise simply to presume such meanings 
in any instances at all. Where it is used of that which is by nature eternal, 
God in himself, it certainly carries the connotation that, say, the 
English words “enduring” or “abiding” would do in the same context: 
everlasting. But that is a connotation by extension, not the univocal core 
of the word. A perfect example of the word’s ambiguity can be found 
in Romans 16:25–26, where in successive verses it is used first of “times 
ages past” or “times ages-long” (χρόνοις αἰωνίοις [chronois aiōniois]) 
and then of “the eternal God” or “the enduring God” or even perhaps 


“the God of Ages” (τοῦ αἰωνίου θεοῦ [tou aiōniou theou]). I might add, 
moreover, that this uncertainty regarding the proper acceptation of aiōnios 
in the New Testament is anything but a reflex of modern faddish revisionism. 
If one consults the literary remains of Greek-speaking Jewish 
scholars of late antiquity, for example, one will find few instances of aiōn 
or aiōnios used to indicate eternal duration: for both Philo of Alexandria 
(an older contemporary of Jesus) and Josephus (born within a decade 
of the crucifixion), an “aeon” is often still only a limited period of time, 
usually a single lifetime, but perhaps as much as three generations. And 
the same is true of Christian thinkers of the early centuries. Late in the 
fourth century, John Chrysostom, in his commentary on Ephesians, 
even used the word aiōnios of the kingdom of the devil specifically to indicate 
that it is temporary (for it will last only till the end of the present 
age, he explains). In the early centuries of the church, especially in the 
Greek and Syrian East, the lexical plasticity of the noun and the adjective 
was fully appreciated—and often exploited—by a number of Christian 
theologians and exegetes (especially such explicit universalists as 
the great Alexandrians Clement and Origen, the “pillar of orthodoxy” 
Gregory of Nyssa and his equally redoubtable sister Makrina, the great 
Syrian fathers Diodore of Tarsus, Theodore of Mopsuestia, Theodoret 
of Cyrus, and Isaac of Nineveh, and so on, as well as many other more 
rhetorically reserved universalists, such as Gregory of Nazianzus). Late 
in the fourth century, for instance, Basil of Caesarea reported that the 
majority of his fellow Christians (at least, in the Greek-speaking East 
with which he was familiar) assumed that “hell” is not an eternal condition, 
and that the “aiōnios punishment” of the age to come would end 
when the soul had been purified of its sins and thus prepared for union 
with God. Well into the sixth century, the great Platonist philosopher 
Olympiodorus the Younger could state as rather obvious that the suffering 
of wicked souls in Tartarus is certainly not endless, atelevtos, but 
is merely aiōnios; and the squalidly brutal and witless Christian emperor 
Justinian, as part of his campaign to extinguish the universalism of the 


“Origenists,” found it necessary to substitute the word atelevtētos for 
aiōnios when describing the punishments of hell, since the latter word 
was not decisive. Early in the eighth century, John of Damascus delineated 
four meanings of aiōn, the last of which—“eternity”—is offered as 
not an intrinsic, but merely an imputed, connotation, presumed whenever 
the word is used of something (like the Age of God’s Kingdom) 
known to be endless; and even then, John affirms, the true eternity 
of God is beyond all ages. As late as the thirteenth century, the East 
Syrian bishop Solomon of Bostra, in his authoritative compilation of 
the teachings of the “holy fathers” of Syrian Christian tradition, stated 
simply as a matter of fact that in the New Testament lealam 
(the Syriac 
rendering of aiōnios) does not mean eternal, and that of course hell is not 
endless. And the fourteenth-century East Syrian Patriarch Timotheus 
II thought it uncontroversial to assert that the aiōnios pains of hell will 
come to an end when the souls cleansed by them, through the prayers 
of the saints, enter paradise. Conscious of the problems the word aiōnios 
presents, some Anglophone translators have in the past chosen simply 
to use an Anglicized version of the Greek word, “aeonian,” and thereby 
avoid the issue of its precise meaning altogether. Others have ventured 
such neologisms as “age-during.” Even, however, if I did not regard the 
effects thus produced as a little silly, I would find either an unsatisfactory 
solution, for a number of reasons—and this brings me to the second 
difficulty. 

In the Gospels there are instances where the substantive aiōn and 
the adjective aiōnios are juxtaposed or associated in a single image or 
utterance (most directly in Mark 10:30 and Luke 18:30). This obvious 
parallel in the Greek is invisible in almost every English translation. For 
us, who read these verses—and indeed the entire text—on the other side 
of a process of translation, there appears to be a clear semantic and conceptual 
distinction between words like “age” and “eternal.” For a first-
century reader of the text, it would not be easy to dissociate or neatly 
segregate terms that were simply different versions of the same word. 
For a long time, I considered translating aiōnios as “enduring” or “last



ing,” the latter, I confess, because the “last” in “lasting” seemed the best 
I could do at insinuating into the text some faint echo of a hint of the 
eschatological resonance of the word—its clear reference to the Kingdom 
of God, “the Age to come”—in several contexts. But, in the end, I 
feared the loss of that vital and theologically portentous echo. I might 
have decided simply upon “age-long,” admittedly. Ultimately, though, 
I decided that to treat aiōnios as denoting only duration (whether eternal 
or limited), rather than a certain quality or dimension of reality as 
well, would still fail to cast any light upon the connection between aiōn 
and aiōnios in the text as a whole (especially in the fourth Gospel, where 
the adjective aiōnios seems clearly to indicate a qualitatively different— 
rather than successive—frame of reality, the divine sphere rather than 
the earthly). And this brings me to the third difficulty, which may be 
the most significant. 

Jesus of Nazareth, as presented in the Gospels, was a first-century 
Galilaean who spoke Aramaic and could read Hebrew (if he could speak 
koinē Greek, as I think he most likely could, he certainly did not do so 
when teaching his disciples or preaching to the multitudes in Galilee 
and Judaea); and, if the sayings attributed to him in the Gospels are indeed 
faithful transpositions of his words into Greek equivalents, then 
there can be no doubt that the words aiōn and aiōnios correspond to 
various forms and uses of the Hebrew olam or the Aramaic alma, both 
of which most literally mean something at an immense distance, on 
the far horizon, hidden from view, and which are usually used to mean 
“age,” or “period of long duration,” or a time hidden in the depths of 
the far past or far future, or a “world” or “dispensation,” or even “eternity,” 
and so on; but it can also mean simply an extended period, and 
not necessarily a particularly long one, with a natural term. Moreover, 
the Septuagint—which, in its various forms, was the Bible for much 
of the early church, and which provides nine-tenths of all the quotations 
from Hebrew scripture found in the New Testament—serves as 
something of a guide to how various expressions of the Jewish concept 
olam or alma were typically rendered in Greek (for instance, in Deu



teronomy 15:17 olam is used to indicate the period of the life of a slave, 
and in the Septuagint version of that passage is rendered as aiōn). There 
really is no word in Hebrew that naturally means “eternity,” either temporal 
or atemporal, or any word that naturally means “forever”; the 
claim occasionally made by champions of the received view—that both 
aiōn and olam in scripture mean “eternal” typically rather than defectively—
is not merely logically impossible to verify, but simply false. 
There are, however, metaphoric, circumlocutory, or hyperbolic words 
and phrases that convey the idea of an extremely long period, which 
may even be endless in duration (but which, then again, may not be); 
and these locutions are recognizable just below the surface of certain 
standard Greek phrases in the Septuagint and the New Testament. Behind 
aiōn lies olam (if we confine ourselves to the Hebrew forms), and 
behind various constructions of aiōn lie corresponding constructions 
of olam. For instance, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα (eis ton aiōna)—often translated 
as “forever” but literally meaning “unto the age” or “until the age” or 
“into the age” or “throughout the age”—is the equivalent of leolam 
or adolam 
(“unto the age” or “until the age”). The phrase εἰς τοὺς 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων (eis tous aiōnas tōn aiōnōn)—often translated as 
“forever and ever” or something similar, but literally meaning “unto 
the ages of the ages”—and the related ὁ αἰὼν τῶν αἰώνων (ho aiōn tōn 
aiōnōn), “the age of the ages,” represent something like the Hebrew leolam 
vaed 
(“unto an age and beyond”) or leolameiolamim 
(“unto ages 
of ages”). More important here, however, the age to which many uses of 
both aiōn and aiōnios refer is surely the olam haba, 
“the Age to come”: 
the age or world of God that is coming to this earth, the Age of the 
Kingdom or of that reality now hidden in God. In the Greek of the New 
Testament, this is often rendered as ὁ αἰὼν ἐρχόμενος (ho aiōn erchomenos), 
“the coming age,” or ὁ μέλλων αἰών (ho mellōn aiōn), “the age 
about to come,” or, more simply and mysteriously, ἐκεῖνος αἰών (ekeinos 
aiōn), “that age.” And that coming age must be distinguished from 
the olam hazeh, 
“this present age,” which in Greek is οὗτος καιρός 
(houtos kairos) or οὗτος αἰών (houtos aiōn), “this time” or “this age”; or 


ἐνεστὼς καιρός (enestōs kairos) or ἐνεστὼς αἰών (enestōs aiōn), “the 
present time” or “the present age”; or ὁ νῦν αἰών (ho nyn aiōn), “the 
age now.” It is almost certainly the case that in the New Testament, and 
especially in the teachings of Jesus, the adjective aiōnios is the equivalent 
of something like the phrase leolam, 
but also the case that it cannot be 
neatly discriminated from the language of the olam haba 
without losing 
something of the theological depth and religious significance it possessed 
in the time of Christ. One sees an apparent interchangeability 
of the terms “aeonian” and “the Age to come,” I might add, at various 
junctures in the text, and in certain scattered evidences from the early 
centuries of the church. For instance, Mark 3:29 and Matthew 12:32 
are obviously two versions of the same logion, but where the former 
speaks of an “aeonian” transgression the latter speaks of a transgression 
that cannot simply be pardoned “in this age or in the age to come.” 
As late as the early fourth century, when the text of the Nicene Creed 
was written, using the Apostles’ Creed as a paradigm, the scriptural 
language of “eternal” or “aeonian” life—ζωή αἰώνιος (zōē aiōnios)— 
with which the earlier symbol of the faith concluded, was rendered instead 
as “the life of the Age to come”—ζωὴ τοῦ μέλλοντος αἰῶνος 
(zōē tou mellontos aiōnos)—suggesting that even at that late date the two 
concepts were not clearly distinct from one another. New Testament 
scholars as theologically diverse as Marcus Borg and N. T. Wright have 
suggested that translators might do well in many or most instances to 
render aiōnios as “of the age to come”; in fact, in Wright’s own translation 
of the New Testament he does just this wherever he deems it appropriate 
(though his resolve inexplicably deserts him at the crucial juncture 
of Matthew 25:46). I have not quite followed suit. Somewhat more 
vaguely, perhaps, I have generally rendered aiōnios as “of” or “in” either 
“that Age” (ekeinos aiōn) or “the Age,” using the unqualified noun alone 
to suggest a long, if indeterminate, duration, but using the uppercase 
letter to suggest something of its eschatological or otherworldly resonance. 
This leaves it to the reader to decide whether he or she wishes 
to read “Age” here as meaning an eternity of duration, an eternity of 


quality, an indefinite (if long) span of time, or the Age that is coming. 
Only in a few cases, where the context warrants, have I used a different 
rendering. Wherever the word aiōnios appears in the text in a distinctive 
construction, I have indicated the fact in a footnote, for clarity’s sake. 

2.The next word is γέεννα (gehenna). In the New Testament there 
is no single Greek term corresponding to the Anglo-Saxon “hell,” despite 
the prodigality with which that word is employed in traditional 
English translations, and no term at all that quite corresponds to the 
picture of hell—a kingdom of ingenious tortures ruled by Satan—that 
took ever more opulent and terrifying mythical shape in later Christian 
centuries. Rather, there is “Hades,” the realm of the dead beneath the 
earth, corresponding to the Hebrew Sheol (where, for instance, both 
“Dives” and Lazarus await the end of all things, or where perhaps disembodied 
souls heard the gospel from Jesus before his resurrection, 
and so on); there is “Tartarus” (once, in 2 Peter 2:4), a name drawn 
from pagan Greek lore referring to a place of postmortem imprisonment 
and punishment, and most especially to the prison of the Titans, 
but in the New Testament referring not to some sort of final “hell” of 
perpetual torment, but solely to the subterranean prison where fallen 
angels and their demonic offspring are held until the day of judgment; 
and then there is “the gehenna,” the Aramaic form of the Hebrew GeHinnom, 
“Valley of Hinnom” (originally the GebenHinnom, 
“Valley 
of Hinnom’s Son”). This last term appears eleven times in the synoptic 
Gospels (seven in Matthew, three in Mark, and one in Luke), and only 
once in the rest of the New Testament (in the Letter of James). Precisely 
why this valley to the south and west of Jerusalem had by Christ’s 
time become, in apocalyptic literature and emerging Rabbinic tradition, 
a name for a place of punishment or purification or both is difficult 
to tell. Scripture and tradition say that the Tophet was there, the 
place of child sacrifice for worshippers of Moloch and Ba’al, a practice 
attested in Leviticus, 2 Chronicles, 2 Kings, Isaiah, and Jeremiah; and 
while there is as yet little archaeological evidence supporting the claim, 
the association of the Ge-Hinnom with the sacrifice of infants to evil 

gods was well established long before the Christian period. There is 
also some small evidence in the valley’s southwest reaches that it might 
have been a place of tombs and (after the arrival of the Romans) of 
crematory grounds. There is as well a mediaeval tradition, which may 
be based on older accounts, that the valley served as a rubbish tip and 
charnel ground, where refuse was burned and where animal and human 
corpses were left as carrion, but again the archaeological evidence for 
this is wholly lacking. Christ himself describes the valley in terms of the 
description in Isaiah 66:24 of human corpses being consumed by inexterminable 
worms and inextinguishable fires (neither of which, incidentally, 
is described as either otherworldly or eternal in nature). Then 
again, these same images also fit well with Jeremiah’s vision of the Ge-
Hinnom gorged with corpses—the “valley of slaughter”—as a result of 
God’s historical punishment of Jerusalem and of those Israelites who 
had worshipped false gods and sacrificed their babies, using the king of 
Babylon as the instrument of his wrath; and, indeed, some very formidable 
New Testament scholars over the years, noting more than incidental 
echoes of Jeremiah and Isaiah in the teachings of Jesus, have concluded 
that the language of the gehenna in the synoptic Gospels really 
referred to the historical “wrath” and “judgment” that many could see 
descending on Israel in Jesus’s own time (culminating in the fall of Jerusalem 
and destruction of the Temple in AD 70), rather than to a cosmic 
Day of Judgment yet to dawn. I happen to concur. After all, Jesus in the 
Gospels clearly states that the “eschatological” events he prophesies 
will come to pass during the lifetime of some of his listeners. But no one 
knows for sure precisely how this valley became a metaphor for divine 
punishment, in this world or the next, or exactly what the image’s figural 
function in Christ’s evangel was. 

Neither do we know with great certainty precisely what meanings 
and connotations the term would have had for Jesus or for his listeners. 
Before, during, and soon after the time of Jesus, it was common parlance 
among a great many sects and schools, and was understood sometimes 
as a place of final destruction, sometimes simply as a place of pun



ishment, and sometimes as a place of purgatorial regeneration. The two 
dominant rabbinical schools of Christ’s time, that of Shammai and that 
of Hillel, both spoke of it as a place of purification or punishment for a 
limited period, but both also taught that for the incorrigibly wicked 
there would or could be a state of eternal or final shame, remorse, suffering, 
or ruin; Shammai had a somewhat grimmer view of the number 
of the ultimately lost (about a third of humanity, on some accounts), 
whereas Hillel had a far keener sense of the power of God’s mercy to 
save. For Shammai, the gehenna was principally a refiner’s fire for those 
souls neither incorrigibly wicked nor blamelessly good, and those subjected 
to its pains would ultimately be raised up to paradise. Hillel apparently 
thought of the gehenna as a place of final punishment and annihilation 
(body and soul) of the utterly depraved, but thought their 
number extremely small. And rabbinical tradition says that it is from 
Hillel that what became the standard Rabbinic view—that no one can 
suffer in the gehenna for more than twelve months—originally comes; 
the idea at least goes back as far as Rabbi Akiva, in the generation just 
after Christ. But, really, we do not know whether Jesus advanced a similar 
view of the gehenna’s fire, or what duration he might have assigned 
to the sufferings of those committed to it, or how metaphorically or literally 
he or his listeners might have understood its imagery. Clearly, 
though, metaphor was his natural idiom, and so it seems unlikely that 
his language here should be assumed to be any more literal than his language 
of ovens or harvests or threshing floors or the closed doors of 
feasts. And later Christian tradition casts no real light on the issue, 
given the diversity of views that prevailed in the early centuries of the 
church, and the total absence of any language of the gehenna, or of any 
kind of lasting postmortem torment, in the earliest Christian documents 
we possess, the letters of Paul. As for whether Jesus viewed that 
fire as one of final destruction or one of purification, this too is difficult 
to say with certainty. The former possibility seems in keeping with the 
apparently “annihilationist” images frequently employed by Jesus— 
chaff and darnel weeds and dead branches being consumed in an oven 


(if these are metaphors for sinners rather than, as certain patristic exegetes 
believed, for their sins)—as well as with his talk of the gehenna’s 
power to destroy both body and soul. The latter possibility, however, 
could explain those same images equally well while also, at the same 
time, making sense of certain other metaphors used by Jesus in the 
Gospels to describe the punishments that follow from divine judgment: 
to wit, if remanded to the prison, “you shall most certainly not emerge 
from there until you repay the very last pittance” (Matthew 5:26; cf. 
Luke 12:59); the unmerciful slave is “delivered . . . to the inquisitors 
until he should repay everything owing” (Matthew 18:34); some wicked 
slaves “will be beaten with many blows” and others “beaten with few 
blows” (Luke 12:47, 48); “everyone will be salted with fire,” the fire in 
question being explicitly that of the gehenna, and salting being a common 
image of purification and preservation—for “salt is good” (Mark 
9:49–50). It might also explain why the Greek word used for “punishment” 
in Matthew 25:46 is κόλασις (kolasis)—which typically refers to 
remedial punishment—rather than τιμωρία (timōria)—which typically 
refers to retributive justice (it might not, however, since by late antiquity 
kolasis had perhaps become somewhat less specific in connotation). 
And, if one regards Paul’s language as a reliable reflection of the 
teachings of the apostolic church, one might take 1 Corinthians 3:12– 
15—which distinguishes not between the saved and the “damned,” but 
only between those who (their works passing the test of fire) merit rewards 
in the Age to come and those who (their works failing that test) 
will instead have to be saved “as by fire”—as at least a suggestive gloss. 
As for the remaining possibility, that the gehenna is a name for a place 
neither of annihilation nor of purification, but of eternal conscious torment—
the God of love’s perpetual torture chamber—for this rather 
repellant idea there is easily the least evidence in the Gospels (if any); 
but the notion may have some substantial precedent in Jewish intertestamental 
apocalyptic literature, such as the Book of Enoch, as well as 
in some early Rabbinic traditions, and it accords with most later Christian 
readings of that sole suggestive verse, Matthew 25:46 (especially 


after the fifth century). One might also suppose that other images of 
exclusion used by Jesus—locked doors, outer darkness, wailing and the 
grinding of teeth—are descriptions of a literally perpetual state of existence 
after death, of which there can be no end and from which there is 
no hope of deliverance through purification. And one can perhaps assume 
that the “inexcusable” sin of blasphemy against the Spirit, mentioned 
in all three synoptic Gospels, is one for which the penalty exacted 
must be everlasting, rather than one necessarily leading to either 
annihilation or purification. But the texts do not actually say any of that, 
and again, the absence of any hint of such a notion in the Pauline corpus 
(or, for that matter, in the fourth Gospel, or the “Catholic Epistles,” or 
those very early doctrinal and confessional texts the Didache and 
Apostles’ Creed, or the writings of the Apostolic Fathers . . .) makes the 
very concept nearly as historically suspect as it is morally unintelligible. 
Moreover, to read back into these texts either the traditional view of 
dual and in some sense synchronously eternal postmortem destinies or 
the developed high mediaeval Roman Catholic view of an absolute distinction 
between “Hell” and “Purgatory” would be either (in the 
former case) a dogmatic reflex rather than an exegetical necessity or (in 
the latter) an act of simple historical illiteracy. But I leave it to readers 
to reconcile the various eschatological passages of the New Testament 
with one another, or not, as they choose; the most I can do is offer an 
observation about two of the greatest and most brilliant Church Fathers 
of the later fourth and early fifth centuries. The Greek-speaking 
Gregory of Nyssa, who was a universalist and who simply assumed the 
purgatorial view of the gehenna, was able to unite all the various biblical 
images and claims in a fairly seamless synthesis in his writings, omitting 
nothing known to him as Christian canon. Conversely, the Latin-
speaking Augustine, who took very much the contrary view, was far 
more selective in his use of scripture, was dependent on often misleading 
translations, and had to expend enormous energy on qualifying, rephrasing, 
and explaining away a host of passages that did not really conform 
well to the theological system he imagined he had found in Paul’s 


writings. This is, if nothing else, instructive. For myself, it seems clear 
that the gehenna is an image of historical destruction in Christ’s preaching, 
not of eternal suffering, or in fact of any particular postmortem 
destiny. But that is neither here nor there. I have translated “the gehenna” 
as “the Vale of Hinnom” or “Hinnom’s Vale,” keeping the proper 
name (which would have been audible to Jesus’s listeners) but using the 
somewhat daintily pretentious “vale” to insinuate a hint of gauzy otherworldliness 
into the image (since by Jesus’s time it was clearly no longer 
simply a geographical designation, but a metaphor with an enormous 
range of associations and connotations). 

3.The next term is Ἰουδαῖος (Ioudaios)—or Ἰουδαῖοι (Ioudaioi) in 
the plural—which is usually rendered “Jew” or “Jews,” except in places 
where “Judaean” or “Judaeans” seems better to fit the context: again, a 
perfectly justifiable practice, but also one that inadvertently introduces 
a distinction into the text that would not have been entirely intended 
by the authors. The books of the New Testament were written in an 
age in which national, ethnic, religious, and racial identities were not 
arranged in the often pernicious categories that came to hold sway in 
subsequent centuries; and it would be a severe distortion of the texts of 
the New Testament to allow these later developments to cast a shadow 
backward onto a time innocent of the evils of mediaeval or modern history. 
For example—and the most striking example—the Gospel of John 
has often been accused of anti-Semitism, despite the anachronism of 
the very concept. Where English readers are accustomed to reading the 
Gospel as referring, often opprobriously, to “the Jews,” the original text 
is usually referring to the indigenous Temple and synagogue authorities 
of Judaea, or to Judaeans living outside Judaea, or even to “Judaeans” as 
opposed to “Galileans” (see, for instance, John 7:1). The Gospel definitely 
reflects the disenchantment of Jewish Christians in Asia Minor 
with those they saw as having expelled them from the synagogue, and 
later Christian culture certainly often took this as an excuse for anti-
Jewish violence and injustice, but it would be misleading to impute to 
the Gospel the sort of religious prejudices born in later generations, 

or certainly the racial ideologies that are so much a part of the special 
legacy of post-Enlightenment modernity. I have rendered the word as 
“Judaean” or “Judaeans” throughout, even where that sounds somewhat 
awkward, and even in places where “Jew” or “Jews” would be an utterly 
anodyne or bracingly affirmative translation. After all, the general extension 
of the term “Jews” to all who worshipped Israel’s God meant 
principally that their cultic life was focused on the Temple in Jerusalem. 
Again, my rationale for doing this, and for ignoring my own twinge of 
reluctance whenever it produced a somewhat inept construction, is that 
I thought it better to preserve the unity of the word and the concept 
in the language of the ancient authors than to impose distinctions that 
would make the texts conform more readily to our cultural categories 
(and historical sins). 

4. The next word is λόγος (logos), which in certain special instances 
is quite impossible for a translator to reduce to a single word in English, 
or in any other tongue (though one standard Chinese version 
of the Bible renders logos in the prologue of John’s Gospel as 道 (tao), 
which is about as near as any translation could come to capturing the 
scope and depth of the word’s religious, philosophical, and metaphoric 
associations in those verses, while also carrying the additional meaning 
of “speech” or “discourse”). To be clear, in most contexts in the New 
Testament, logos can be correctly and satisfactorily rendered as “word,” 
“utterance,” “teaching,” “story,” “message,” “speech,” or “communication.” 
In the very special case of the prologue to John’s Gospel, however, 
any such translation is so inadequate as to produce nothing but a 
cipher without a key. Few modern readers or, for that matter, readers in 
any age could be expected to be cognizant of the complexities of late 
antique metaphysics, or to be familiar with the writings of a Hellenistic 
Jewish philosopher like Philo of Alexandria (c. 25 BC–c. AD 50), 
or to be much acquainted with the speculative grammar of Hellenistic 
Judaism’s “Wisdom” literature. And so they could scarcely be aware 
of the vast range of meanings the word logos had acquired by the time 
John’s Gospel was written, many of which are unquestionably present 

in its use in the prologue. Over many centuries logos had come to mean 
“mind,” “reason,” “rational intellect,” “rational order,” “spirit”; as well 
as “expression,” “manifestation,” “revelation”; as well as “original principle,” 
“spiritual principle,” and even “divine principle.” Really, the full 
spectrum of its philosophical connotations could scarcely be contained 
in a single book. In the special context of late antique, Greek-speaking 
Judaism, and particularly in the work of Philo, the word had come to 
mean a very particular kind of divine reality, a secondary or derivative 
divine principle proceeding from the Most High God and mediating between 
God and the created order. There was a shared prejudice among 
many of the philosophical systems of late antiquity to the effect that the 
highest God, God proper, in his utter transcendence could not interact 
directly with or appear immediately within the created order; hence it 
was only through a “secondary god” or “expressed divine principle” that 
God made the world and revealed himself in it. It was assumed by many 
Jewish and then Christian thinkers that the theophanies of the Jewish 
scriptures were visitations of the Logos, God’s self-expression in his 
divine intermediary or Son, as Philo called him. To an educated reader 
of the late first or early second century, the Logos of John’s prologue 
would clearly have been just this divine principle: at once the Most 
High God’s manifestation of himself in a secondary divine moment, 
and also the pervasive and underlying rational power creating, sustaining, 
and governing the cosmos. For all of which reasons, I have chosen 
not to translate the word at all in the first chapter of John—or in, more 
controversially, John 5:38, 10:35; or in, yet more controversially, 1 John 
1:1, 10; or in, most controversially of all, Revelation 19:13 (though perhaps 
for somewhat different reasons in this last case). In certain usages, 
the word is so capacious in its meanings and associations that it must be 
accounted unique; any attempt to limit it to a single English term would 
be to risk reducing it to a conceptual phantom of itself. 

5. The next word is the verb προορίζειν (proörizein), which has traditionally—
as a result of the Vulgate Latin translation—been rendered 
as “to predestine.” This is simply incorrect (though some inferior lexica 

over the years, taking their lead from traditional theological usage in 
the West, have incorporated it in their definitions of the verb). The 
word ὁρίζειν (horizein) (whence our word “horizon”), means “to demarcate,” 
“delineate,” “to mark out as a boundary,” “to distinguish,” 
“to sort,” “to define,” “to assign,” “to plan out,” “to make determinate,” 
or “to appoint”; and prohorizein 
is simply to do this in advance. 
It certainly possesses none of the grim, ghastly magnificence of the late 
Augustinian concept of “predestination”: an entirely irresistible predetermining 
causal force, not based on divine foreknowledge but rather 
logically prior to everything it ordains, by which God infallibly destines 
only a very few to salvation and thereby infallibly consigns the 
vast majority of humanity to unending torment. Thus, in two of the six 
instances of the verb’s use in the New Testament (Romans 8:29–30), 
Paul—blissfully innocent of later theological developments and anxieties—
explicitly treats this divine “pre-demarcation” as consequent upon 
divine foreknowledge, and does so without any qualification or noticeable 
pangs of theological conscience. (1 Peter 1:1–2, more concisely, says 
the same thing.) Of the very few instances of the verb or its cognate 
noun προορισμός (proörismos) in Greek literature before the New Testament 
(I am aware of only two), it carries no connotation of predestination. 
More tellingly, none of the Greek-speaking Church Fathers 
ever read the word as having such a connotation, or even seemed to suspect 
that such a reading was a possibility. The Augustinian understanding 
of “predestination,” for all its epochal significance for later Western 
Christian thought, is a late fourth-century theological innovation, the 
inadvertent invention of a Paul who never existed, a theological accident 
prompted by a defective Latin translation and the temperamental 
idiosyncrasies of a single sullen genius (with at times a singularly dismal 
understanding of the “good news”). No matter what one’s theology, the 
traditional rendering is simply insupportable. I have therefore translated 
the verb, with bland literality, as “to mark out in advance.” 

6.The next word is ἄνθρωπος (anthrōpos), which means “man” or 
“human being,” but which is not simply another word for ἀνήρ (anēr) 

(“man” strictly in the sense of an adult male). Like the German Mensch 
(as distinct from Mann), it is a masculine noun that, used in either the 
definite singular (to mean “the man” or “that man”) or the indefinite singular 
(to mean “a man”), would typically refer only to a male; but, used in 
the singular as a categorical designation, it can mean “man” in the sense of 
“mankind” or “humanity”; and, used in the plural, it can refer to human 
beings in general. I have not striven in this translation for “inclusive language,” 
at least where it would involve altering the text. For one thing, 
I would dislike the pretense that the text does not use the sort of language 
that it does, and I think readers can be trusted to know that these 
are first-century writings. Moreover, mine is not a version written for 
liturgical or homiletic purposes, but an attempt to make the original text 
visible through as thin a layer of translation as I can contrive to superimpose 
upon it. So, in a few places where a late modern phrase like “human 
being” or “human person” would have seemed jarringly awkward, I have 
yielded to the sirens of euphony and used “man” or “men”—quite unrepentantly 
in certain instances (no impulse of conscience, however fervent, 
could cause me to sacrifice as grand, ancient, poetic, and mysterious 
a title as “Son of Man” in favor of “Human” or “Child of Humanity” 
or something equally insipid). Again, I trust readers not only to have a 
sense of the realities of cultural history, but also to be able to distinguish 
between substantial and empty gestures. All that said, however, in every 
instance where it proved both possible and agreeable to do so, I have employed 
the term “human being” or something similar. In some cases I 
find this a very happy way of adding what I take to be a needed emphasis 
to certain phrases, especially those in which the plural noun is modified 
by the adjective “all.” For some reason—possibly simply on account of 
our settled habit of hearing certain biblical phrases as saying what we expect 
them to say—we often fail to notice some of the more striking and 
radical theological formulations that appear in the New Testament; and 
somehow using phrases like “all human beings” or “every human being” 
seems to make them more audible to us than does the use of the more 
familiar “all men” (or even “all persons”). I am thinking of such verses 


as Romans 5:18; 1 Timothy 2:4, 4:10; Titus 2:11 (when translated correctly), 
as well as of the light they cast upon such similar or related verses 
as John 12:32; 1 Corinthians 15:22; 1 Timothy 2:6; and 2 Peter 3:9. 

7. The next word is ἔργα (erga), plural of ἔργον (ergon), which 
means “work,” “task,” “skill,” “labor,” “operation,” “handiwork,” or 
“business”; or, more simply, “work” in the sense of “deed,” “act,” or 
“feat”; or, in certain special contexts, a ritual action to be performed or 
a duty to be discharged. In most cases in the New Testament, the word 
refers simply to discrete actions, labors, or deeds, and my translation reflects 
that. There are some special instances in Paul’s letters, however, 
in which the “works” in question are specifically “works of the Law”— 
that is to say, obligations imposed by the Mosaic code, like circumcision, 
Sabbath obligations, or kosher laws—and so I have rendered erga 
as “observances” (which is one of the standard renderings of the plural 
form when used in connection with religious obligations). I do this 
principally because, removed as most of us are not only from the ritual 
life of first-century Judaism, but also from the idiom Paul shared with 
many of his contemporaries, we tend to forget what the principal religious 
issues were for him. And, perhaps needless to say, there is a long 
tradition of reading Paul as though his concerns were entirely different: 
Where he drew a distinction between, on the one hand, the righteousness 
or rewards that one can achieve through such observances (which, 
incidentally, he affirms) and, on the other, the righteousness God takes 
account of entirely in respect of one’s faithfulness (which involves good 
deeds and which God graciously rewards), many Christian theologians 
down the centuries (at least in the West) have taken him to be drawing 
a distinction between, on the one hand, the divine blessings one 
wins through one’s good deeds (which supposedly Paul denies are possible) 
and, on the other, the entirely gratuitous graces bestowed by God 
without any prevision of or attention to one’s moral deeds at all (else 
grace were not grace). This is clearly an error, and introduces an antithesis 
into Paul’s thought of which his writings betray no consciousness 
(see, for example, Romans 2:7–14). Taken to its extreme (which, 

logically, it always has to be) it leads to an absurd situation: Not only 
is one obliged to read Paul’s teaching as diametrically opposed to the 
theology of “judgment according to works” clearly enunciated by Jesus 
in the Gospels, by the Letter of James, by the book of Revelation, and 
so on (however this has been dissembled by a long tradition of forced 
readings), but one is also obliged to read Paul’s teaching as diametrically 
opposed to itself, since he too clearly affirms “judgment according to 
works” (see Romans 2:1–16, 4:10–12; 1 Corinthians 3:12–15; 2 Corinthians 
5:10; Philippians 2:16; and so on). And, for those who presuppose 
a perfect theological consistency in the New Testament, it can 
lead to even more ungainly exegetical contortions, such as John Calvin’s 
weirdly endearing practice of treating Christ’s more demanding moral 
counsels in the Gospels (his advice to the rich young ruler, his exhortation 
to his disciples to be perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect, 
and so on) as exercises in irony (for surely, reasoned Calvin, Jesus cannot 
mean that our good deeds are relevant to our election, or that we 
should strive for spiritual perfection). Certainly, Paul affirms that it is 
God who gives the power and grace necessary for the soul to perform 
good works, and that without God creatures can achieve nothing; but 
he never suggests either that this power and grace are irresistible predestining 
forces, or that good works are not genuinely criteria by which 
God weighs souls in the balance (and determines, perhaps, whether they 
are to be rewarded for their works or instead are to be saved through 
the fire by which their works will be consumed). One may view the 
relation between divine grace and human effort in Paul’s thought in 
whatever way one wishes (though the Eastern Christian language of 
synergeia—synergy—seems clearly to be nearest to Paul’s own thought 
and language). But what one certainly ought not to do is mistake Paul’s 
distinction between faithfulness of the heart and works of the Law for 
an opposition between mere personal belief and concrete moral effort. 
For him, as for other writers in the New Testament, human beings are 
justified—that is, “proved righteous” or “made righteous” (see below)— 
“by works, and not by faith alone” (James 2:24). 


8.The next word is ὑποκριτής (hypokritēs)—or ὑποκριταί (hypokritai) 
in the plural—which is understandably usually translated as “hypocrite” 
or “hypocrites.” But in the Greek of the first century the word 
did not quite mean what “hypocrite” has come to mean to us: a person 
whose actions belie his words, or whose moral character contradicts his 
professed moral principles. The word originally designated a public interpreter 
or expounder of a text, one who declaimed verse, a rhapsode, 
or an actor playing a role on stage. As a term of abuse, it meant simply 
one who dissembles or deceives, or one who is putting on a performance 
to impress or beguile others. I have rendered the word variously in this 
translation, as context dictates, but in most instances have rendered it 
as “charlatan” or “charlatans.” 
9. The next word is the plural noun ἔθνη (ethnē), which can mean 
“nations,” “peoples,” or “gentiles,” and which I have translated as one or 
another of these as context dictates. It is as well to note, however, that 
behind these three English words, wherever they appear in the text, 
there is only a single Greek word and so, arguably, only a single concept. 
10. The next word is actually a pair of words: λύτρον (lytron) and 
ἀντίλυτρον (antilytron). The former appears only twice (Matthew 20: 
28; Mark 10:45) and the latter only once (1 Timothy 2:6), and they are 
effectively synonymous. There are also occasional verbal formulations 
derived from the same root. Each refers to Christ in his role specifically 
as redeemer and is traditionally translated “ransom.” Though this is not 
wrong, it does not quite convey the full meaning that the word, in either 
of its forms, carries in the text. We often fail to appreciate how often 
the language of salvation in the New Testament employs the imagery 
and terminology of contemporary civil law regarding slavery. A lytron 
or antilytron is, in that context, the required fee for the emancipation 
of a slave, paid to the slaveholder in order to secure legal manumission. 
In the earliest centuries of Christian thought, the meaning of the word 
was still obvious to all readers; the only question of theological moment 
regarding this manumission fee was to whom we ought to imagine it 
had been paid: to the devil, our principal slaveholder, so to speak, or to 

death, the household of our bondage. But, as the centuries flowed on 
and Christianity spread into other lands, cultures, and languages, the 
original meaning was occasionally lost sight of, so much so that some 
Christians came to imagine that the word referred to a ransom paid to 
God the Father by the Son, to appease God’s righteous wrath, or to repair 
his injured dignity, or to yield tribute to the awful majesty of his 
sovereignty. That idea is not only incoherent, but also entirely alien to 
the way the word is used in the New Testament; there is no suggestion 
there that, in Christ, God pays God off, or God rescues us from God; 
rather, the work of salvation is depicted as a single, unified act of rescue, 
whereby God the Father, through the Son, redeems (that is, “buys 
back”) his children from the slavery into which they have been sold, 
even at the most terrible of costs (the death of the divine Son). So I have 
rendered it by such phrases as “the price of liberation” or “fee for emancipation,” 
and so on, and have rendered its verbal correlates accordingly. 

11. Next comes a cluster of words springing up around a common 
root: the adjective δίκαιος (dikaios), which can be translated as 
“just,” “right,” “righteous”; the noun δικαιοσύνη (dikaiosynē), which 
can be translated as “righteousness,” “justice,” “what is correct,” “what 
is proper,” “rectitude”; the verb δικαιόω (dikaioō), which can be translated 
as “make just,” “make right,” “rectify,” “correct,” or alternatively, 
as “prove just,” “show to be right,” “vindicate”; and all other words related 
to the noun δίκη (dikē), usually rendered as “justice,” “rightness,” 
“correct custom.” Here I have had to betray my prejudice for formal 
consistency of translation. To begin with, in regard to the adjectives 
and nouns, it is not always easy to decide, when translating a particular 
passage or a particular author, whether it is better to use words like 
“just” and “justice” or words like “righteous” and “righteousness,” given 
the connotations of each. The nearest we come to words that split the 
difference are “right,” “correct” or “what is right,” “uprightness,” “rectitude,” 
“correctness”; and I have employed some of these where it 
seemed wise to do so. In the world of the New Testament, religious 
and legal identity—or religious and legal obligation—were not distinct 

concepts, as they usually are for us. But in some instances it is clear that 
the context is more juridical than religious or moral, and in other instances 
that the opposite is true, and I have simply made as prudent a 
choice as I could in each case regarding which word to use. Moreover, 
there are two special problems of translation that have required firm 
decisions on my part precisely where I would have preferred indecisive 
vacillation. First, in most translations of the New Testament the word 
dikaiosynē is rendered as “righteousness”; but it often carries the specific 
connotation of “ritual propriety” or “what is legally correct,” and in the 
Bible it carries the even more specific connotation of “what is correct 
according to the Law (of Moses)”—as in the Septuagint’s version of 
Isaiah 26:2, or as in Matthew 3:15; where appropriate, I have attempted 
to make this clear. Second, the word dikaioō is usually translated as “justify”—
or, in its passive construction, as “to be justified”—but this does 
not really capture either of the word’s proper meanings exactly, at least 
not in modern English; and in fact, as a theological term, “justification” 
has over the centuries acquired so many questionable connotations 
that it is more likely to obscure the original authors’ intentions 
than to reflect them. Again, dikaioō can mean either “rectify,” “set right,” 
“correct” or “vindicate,” “prove right,” “show to be just”; and it is not 
always clear, especially in Paul’s letters, which of these senses should 
predominate, since arguments can often be made for either. In reality, 
I believe, he used the word in both senses, according to context. Of 
course, from the early fifth century onward, one stream of Western 
theology came to treat Paul’s use of the verb (or of its Latin equivalent, 
justifico) as meaning some sort of merely formal or forensic imputation 
of righteousness, rather than either a real corrective transformation or a 
real evidential vindication—an interpretation, arguably, that reached its 
most extreme expression in certain of Augustine’s late writings and in 
the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century theologies of figures like John 
Calvin and Cornelius Jansen. But nothing in the word’s history allows 
for such a meaning intrinsically, and there is nothing in Paul’s arguments 
that encourages such a reading (despite our habit of reading and trans



lating Paul through the prism of Augustinian tradition). In the end, I 
found myself constrained to choose between “rectify” and “vindicate” 
(or similar locutions) in each particular instance of the word’s use. 

12. Another uniradical cluster of words comprises both the noun 
πίστις (pistis), often rendered as “faith,” and the verb πιστεύω (pistevō), 
often rendered as “to believe” or “to have faith.” All I wish to 
emphasize here (and in my translation) is that πίστις can mean both 
“trust” in something and the “trustworthiness” of something, and can 
even (somewhat combining these two connotations) be understood as 
“fidelity” or “faithfulness.” And πιστεύω does not really mean “to believe” 
in an impartial and merely intellectual way, but “to vest faith in” 
or “to have trust in” something or someone, and sometimes even “to 
entrust” either oneself or something at one’s disposal to another. I have 
tried to do justice to these connotations in my translation. 
13. Next comes κόσμος (kosmos), which I have for the most part 
chosen not to translate (in the traditional way) as “world,” but simply 
to transliterate as “cosmos.” The effect is often perhaps a bit jarring. 
But, while there are instances in the text where the word functions as 
an equivalent of οἰκουμένη (oikoumenē), the inhabited world of human 
beings, it more frequently means the whole of the created order, the 
heavens no less than the earth. It certainly carries this latter meaning 
in some crucial and occasionally unsettling ways in many verses 
in John’s Gospel, Paul’s letters, and elsewhere. It is good, for example, 
to be reminded that in the New Testament, and in Paul’s theology in 
particular, both slavery to death in sin and final liberation from death 
in divine glory are described as cosmic—not merely human—realities, 
taking in the whole of creation. Moreover, the word “world” as we use 
it today simply does not capture what is most essential to the ancient 
concept of “cosmos,” a word that most literally means “order” or “arrangement” 
or even “loveliness of design.” For us, the “world” is either 
merely the physical reality of nature and society “out there,” or it is the 
human sphere with all its attendant moral and historical contingencies. 
For the late antique cultures from which the New Testament came, the 

“cosmos” was quite literally a magnificently and terribly elaborate order 
of reality that comprehended nature (understood as a rational integrity 
organized by metaphysical principles), the essential principles of 
the natural and animal human condition (flesh and soul, for instance, 
with all their miseries), the spiritual world (including the hierarchies 
of the “divine,” the angelic, and the daemonic), the astral and planetary 
heavens (understood as a changeless realm at once physical and spiritual), 
as well as social, political, and religious structures of authority 
and power (including the governments of human beings, angels, celestial 
“daemons,” gods, terrestrial demons, and whatever other mysterious 
forces might be hiding behind nature’s visible forms). It is a vision of 
the whole of things that is utterly unlike any with which most of us are 
today familiar, and that simply does not correspond to any meaning of 
“world” intuitively obvious to us. For the author of 1 Peter or of 1 John, 
for instance, to tell his readers to have nothing to do with the “cosmos” 
is to say something far more comprehensive, imponderable, and astonishing 
than that they should avoid vice and materialist longings, or that 
they should withdraw from society. It seemed better to me to risk oddity 
of expression than to risk losing sight of these truths. 

14. Next, μετάνοια (metanoia), a word traditionally translated 
as “repentance,” but whose literal meaning is a “change of mind,” or 
“of thinking,” or “of intention,” or “of the heart.” “Repentance” is a 
word that today carries none of those connotations naturally; for us, 
it is a largely negative term that means something like “regret and repudiation,” 
both of which may be some part of the special meaning of 
μετάνοια in the New Testament, but which say nothing of the real inner 
transformation that is a far larger part of the word’s sense; μετάνοια 
and its correlative verb μετανοέω (metanoeō) have a positive and genuinely 
transitive power, such that at various times the New Testament 
uses the formulation of a μετάνοια εἰς (metanoia eis), an interior change 
“toward” (God, salvation, life, full knowledge, or so on). Admittedly, in 
modern English idiom neither “change of mind” nor “change of heart” 
carries quite the hortatory moral force or rhetorical vigor of the Greek 

word, but either is more accurate than the now dully conventional “repentance.” 
My only difficulty here was deciding whether I should use a 
term like “mind” or “thinking” to emphasize the ratiocinative element 
of the concept, or should instead speak of the “heart” in order properly 
to emphasize the affective element. I elected the latter, but with the 
qualification that the heart should be understood in the classical sense, 
as the seat of both the intellect and the passions. And, as the syntax of 
particular verses warrants, I have used “change” or “turn” or “transformation” 
to indicate the metain 
metanoia. 

15. The next word is ψυχή (psychē), which in most versions of the 
New Testament is translated in a great variety of ways, in each instance 
as context seems to dictate. This is a perfectly fair practice, since, again, 
there is no single English equivalent for the word that could possibly 
comprise the full range of its connotations and nuances. The inevitable 
result of this, however, as is the case in any translation of a conceptually 
rich or ambiguous term, is that what appeared to the author of the 
original to be a complex but coherent unity of meaning becomes for the 
translator, and those dependent on his or her labors, a cloud of associations—
or, really, of dissociations. Psychē can mean “life” or “principle of 
life,” or can mean “soul” in the sense of “enlivening force,” or can mean 
“soul” in the sense of “conscious mind” or “self.” Its nearest equivalent 
in Latin is anima, meaning both principle of the body’s life and soul in 
the sense of personal identity or self. Thus, for instance, when Paul distinguishes 
in 1 Corinthians 15:44–46 between the body human beings 
possess in this age and that which they shall receive in the Age to come, 
he speaks of the former as a dissoluble and perishable composite of flesh 
and soul, a σῶμα ψυχικόν (sōma psychikon), but of the latter as an imperishable 
unity, a σῶμα πνευματικόν (sōma pnevmatikon): an “animal” 
or “psychical body,” on the one hand, and a “spiritual” or “pneumatic 
body,” on the other. The substantive psychē, however, I have rendered as 
“soul” throughout, even in those cases where this produces somewhat 
ungainly phrasing. I was prompted to do this by my perhaps overly 
scrupulous principle that what the original author considered a concep

tual unity the translator should try not to convert into a multiplicity of 
distinct concepts; but I was prompted also by my desire that my translation 
reflect the text’s origin in an age when the very idea of physical 
life was still not only inseparable from, but even identical to, the idea of 
the soul—when, that is, the principle of organic life and the principle 
of thought, sensation, and spiritual personality were understood as one 
and the same principle. And this seems to me a doubly important consideration 
in light of what I take to be some of the defective theological 
scholarship of the past (especially within certain Protestant critical traditions 
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries). At one time it was 
fashionable to note that in ancient Hebrew scripture there is no concept—
or at best only a somewhat shadowy and attenuated concept—of 
a “soul” separable from corporeal existence, and then to assert rather 
boldly that the same was true of the Judaism of Christ’s time and so 
also of Christian scripture. This is false. In the intertestamental period, 
when Judaism was well developed in the direction of what we now know 
as Rabbinic tradition, and had been absorbing and synthesizing Persian 
and Greek styles of thought for centuries, most Jews (with the exception, 
apparently, of “mortalist” Sadducees), like most gentiles (again, 
with some exceptions), were well accustomed to thinking of the soul as 
in some sense discrete from the flesh, able to persist in some conscious 
condition after the death of the body. None of them thought like modern 
Cartesians, admittedly, but most of them understood psychē as we 
now use the word “soul”: as simultaneously what makes us alive and 
what makes us who we are. 

At certain points—for instance, 1 Corinthians 2:14 or Jude 1:19— 
I have rendered the adjective psychikos or ψυχικοί (psychikoi) (the plural 
form) simply as “psychical,” fully aware of how odd that looks. My 
reason for doing so is that, in the Greek of the original text, the word 
sometimes obviously reflects a distinction between persons whose 
natures are “psychical” or merely “ensouled” and persons who, as Jude 
puts it, “have spirit” or even “have a spirit.” But most translations distort 
these verses so violently that their original meaning has become 


quite invisible. In the verse from Jude, for instance, most translators 
render psychikoi as vaguely as possible—as “natural,” say, or “sensual”— 
and then capitalize the word “spirit” as though it were a straightforward 
reference to the Holy Spirit (which it certainly is not). Precisely how 
Jude or his readers would have understood this distinction is uncertain, 
but it is there in the text all the same. Today we tend to think that such 
divisions among persons, or even among Christians within the church, 
were among the more exotic eccentricities of the para-Christian or 
“gnostic” movements of the second century and after. But, even if the 
word “gnostic” is useful as a general designation for groups outside the 
ecclesial mainstream, their language on this matter was in continuity 
with language used by early Christians of just about every stripe. Jude 
may not have conceived of such a distinction as some sort of ontological 
division between different kinds of human beings, but he certainly did 
see it as a division between different states of sanctification or “spiritual” 
progress, and he may well have believed that “spirit” is a special 
property acquired by progressive sanctification. (And, frankly, we cannot 
be certain that all the so-called gnostics saw the matter much differently.) 
Which brings me to the next word. 

16.That is, πνεῦμα (pnevma), “spirit,” which (like the word for 
“spirit” in so many tongues) most literally means “wind” or “breath.” 
My principal remark here is that in many passages in the New Testament, 
and especially in some of Paul’s letters, it is impossible to tell 
whether the author is speaking of human “spirit” or of God’s “Spirit.” 
At certain crucial junctures, again in Paul’s letters, the absence of a clear 
distinction seems almost intentional. Traditionally, translators choose 
how the reader should understand the word in moments of uncertainty 
by either capitalizing it or leaving it in the lowercase; and far too often 
the word is capitalized when it probably ought not to be. A particularly 
good example of this is Galatians 5:17, where Paul (whose anthropology 
is considerably more “dualistic” than it is currently fashionable 
to admit) is clearly speaking of an opposition between the desires of 
“the flesh” and of “the spirit” within each human being, but where most 

English translations quite presumptuously and unintelligibly describe 
an opposition between “flesh” and “the [Holy] Spirit.” Another, equally 
good example is 1 Peter 3:18, where “flesh” and “spirit” are again (somewhat 
dualistically) opposed to one another in the form of modal datives—
the one indicating the manner of Christ’s death, the other the 
manner of his resurrection—but where, again, many translators have 
tried to turn the latter into a reference to the Holy Spirit, even though 
both the syntax of the Greek text and the logic of the author’s argument 
make such a reading impossible (among other things, it renders unintelligible 
the claim of the following verse: see my footnotes to those 
verses). Yet another example is Jude 1:19, which I have discussed in the 
section immediately above. And still another might be John 6:63. In any 
event, in my rendering I have been considerably more chaste in my use 
of the capital s than most translators have been in the past. As a general 
rule, I have done it in cases where the word pnevma is accompanied by a 
definite article, in a way that indicates that it is specifically the Spirit of 
God that is being spoken of. I have also used the capital s in many places 
where the article is absent but where something more than “spirit” in 
a vague and abstract sense is meant, and where, again, the reference is 
to a “Spirit” who comes from God. But in several places my judgment 
on the matter is only a best guess, and reflects a distinction that is not 
always clearly present in the text. There are numerous instances—in 
the latter chapters of Romans, say—where the text speaks of “spirit” 
and even “holy spirit,” and it is all but impossible to say whether divine 
or creaturely spirit is at issue. (How, for example, is one to translate 
Romans 8:27? How is one to understand it?) Moreover, I can only caution 
the reader, though without much in the way of further exegetical 
clarity, not to assume the fully developed theology of the Holy Spirit as 
enunciated in later church councils when reading the New Testament. I 
might have dispensed with capitalization altogether and left the matter 
entirely up to the reader; my only reason for not doing so, I confess, was 
to make it all the more conspicuous where I specifically chose not to use 


the capital letter. I might also add that, at a few points—1 Corinthians 
2:15, 3:1, 14:37; Galatians 6:1—I was tempted to render πνευματικός 
(pnevmatikos), or its plural form πνευματικοί (pnevmatikoi), simply as 
“Pneumatic” (as a substantive), but feared this might have the absurd 
effect of summoning up images of tires or drills or bustlines; still, I 
wanted to make clear that Paul appears in those passages almost certainly 
to be speaking of a special class of “spiritual persons” within the 
body of the church, so I resorted to the same dubious strategy of capitalization 
that I have just so rudely deplored (but to a very different 
end). Again, the fear of any hint of “proto-gnosticism” in Paul’s letters 
leads some scholars to reject the conclusion that Paul ever speaks of 
such a special class of Christian; but the text makes it fairly unavoidable, 
and Paul, after all, seems to hint that there are especially advanced 
Christians who, unlike neophytes in the faith, possess “gnosis.” 

17.Then there is σάρξ (sarx), which literally means “flesh” and which 
I translate as “flesh” (I also translate its associated adjective σαρκικός 
[sarkikos] as “fleshly”). This might not seem an exactly daring decision 
on my part, but in many translations various strategies are employed 
precisely to avoid rendering this word literally. It has become something 
of a fashion over the past century for theologians to insist almost 
exclusively on the “worldliness” of Christianity, or on how exuberantly 
it affirms the material order—the material body especially—as the good 
creation of God, or on how radically the early Christian view of corporeality 
supposedly differed from that of more “Hellenistic” or “gnostic” 
or “idealist” schools of thought. And so sarx is often rendered by some 
sort of theologically sanitized circumlocution like “sinful human nature” 
or “fallen human nature” or “the mortal body.” Both this practice 
and the theological platitudes inspiring it should be eschewed at every 
juncture. It is true that there is nothing like an absolute dualism in the 
New Testament, of the sort that would suggest that the physical world 
is ultimately evil, or that the Age to come will not involve a redemption 
of the whole created order; but, even so, there is at least a very strong 

provisional dualism, and when the text speaks of “flesh” in opprobrious 
terms it is not employing a vague metaphor, for which some less upsetting 
abstraction may safely be substituted. As both 1 Corinthians 15: 
40–54 and 1 Peter 3:18, 4:6 make quite clear—and as Matthew 22:30; 
Mark 12:25; Luke 20:36; and perhaps Acts 23:8 all powerfully suggest— 
many early Christians understood the difference between the mortal 
body and the resurrected body (whether Christ’s or ours) as the difference 
between a carnal frame and a kind of life that has transcended the 
flesh (for, as Paul says, “flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God”). At times, the early Christians, no less than their pagan or “gnostic” 
contemporaries, had a somewhat jaundiced view of “this cosmos” 
or “this age,” as well as of “this body of death,” not merely as moral dispensations, 
but as physical realities. 

18. Next comes πορνεία (porneia), along with the related substantives 
πόρνη (pornē) and πόρνος (pornos). Porneia means “prostitution” 
or (more bluntly) “whoring,” but in most traditional translations it is 
rendered as “fornication.” Perhaps, historically speaking, this is very 
nearly a distinction without a difference. In the first-century world, and 
especially in Judaea, casual sexual encounters were not a readily available 
form of recreation; women did not enjoy the liberty (or the safety) 
to go about in many public places, and certainly had little desire to 
court the disastrous social and personal consequences of premarital or 
extramarital liaisons. Most men seeking sexual release outside of marriage 
generally had to pay for the service. Even so, the word’s meaning 
is precise and ought not to be obscured. Similarly, a pornē was a female 
prostitute and a pornos a boy prostitute or hired “catamite,” and prostitutes 
of both sexes were more often than not slaves. In the former case, 
most translations of the New Testament do in fact render the term 
accurately as “harlot” or “whore.” In the latter case, however, they generally 
settle on “fornicator.” Admittedly, there is a complication here, 
inasmuch as pornos is used at many junctures in biblical Greek to mean 
not a catamite, but rather a man who uses prostitutes of either sex; even 
so, the traditional rendering makes neither meaning obvious. I should 

also note that all of these words have a certain indelicacy about them, 
and so I have generally used a coarser word like “whoring” or “whore” 
rather than something blander, like “prostitution” or “prostitute.” 

19. Finally, μακάριος (makarios), which is generally translated as 
“blessed” or “happy” or “fortunate,” and which indeed means all of 
these things. But it is also a word whose original connotations included 
something like “divine blessedness” or “the bliss of the gods,” and which 
well into late antiquity suggested a special intensity of delight and freedom 
from care that the more shopworn renderings no longer quite capture 
(at least not to my ear). I expect that for many readers this will 
prove the most insufferable decision on my part for a number of reasons, 
and one that will be written off as expressing a perverse aversion to 
common phrases or a desire slyly to introduce a hint of Asian mysticism 
into the text, but I have elected to render the word as “blissful” (and I 
remain entirely impenitent in having done so). 
Notes on Authorship 

Regarding the issue of how I have assigned the authorship of the 
various books of the New Testament, I can only say I have followed 
what I regard as the most credible current scholarship. For the most 
part, however, this is not so much a matter of identifying who wrote 
what, but of clearly indicating the depths of our ignorance. Most scholars 
are in agreement that seven of the letters traditionally attributed to 
Paul are indisputably authentic—in the most likely chronological order, 
1 Thessalonians (or, as I prefer to render it, Thessalonikans), Galatians, 
1 Corinthians, Philemon, Philippians, 2 Corinthians, and Romans— 
though some doubt the authenticity of even 1 Thessalonians and Philippians 
(but on rather feeble grounds). Otherwise, the books of the canon 
are of uncertain authorship, and in some cases are pseudonymous; in 
one case, Hebrews, the text is simply anonymous (see below). Even the 
four Gospels were given their names probably only in the second century, 
and the stories that came to surround those names are legendary at 
best. The author of the earliest of them (written around AD 70 perhaps) 


is known to us as Mark, but whether this was indeed his name we do not 
know, and even if it was we still do not know who he really was. The 
evangelist called Matthew, whose Gospel was written perhaps a decade 
or two later, was not the disciple of Jesus who bore that name, but someone 
who had to rely on a combination of Mark’s text (in structure and 
content) and on independent collections of logia, or “sayings,” in order 
to construct his narrative, and who amplified at length upon the originals. 
The probably single author of both the third Gospel (chronologically 
perhaps the latest written) and the book of Acts—which together 
constitute almost a third of the New Testament—is known to us as 
Luke (though neither the Gospel nor Acts uses the name), and tradition 
tells us that he was a gentile Christian, a physician, and a companion 
of Paul. The first two of these claims may well be true, but a 
great many scholars believe that in all likelihood the third is not, despite 
certain passages in Acts written in the first person plural. For one 
thing Paul’s own brief references to his personal story contradict Luke’s 
narrative. For another, Luke’s Gospel is also transparently built upon 
and redacts Mark’s, and draws on logia traditions (many, but not all of 
which, he shares with Matthew). The dominant critical estimate, for 
what little that may ultimately be worth, is that Luke’s books come 
from the late first or even early second century. There are also signs in 
Luke’s Gospel of a sophisticated and purposeful theological sensibility, 
one that even prompts the author to amend the record—or, perhaps, to 
select alternative features of the tradition—in accord with his theological 
concerns. For instance, where Mark and Matthew tell us that the 
centurion below the cross saw in Jesus the son of a god (probably not, 
as commonly translated, God’s Son), Luke tells us the centurion paid 
tribute only to a “righteous man”; where Matthew and Mark (quoting 
Psalm 22) record Christ’s cry of godforsakenness from the cross, Luke 
(quoting Psalm 31 instead) reports only that he peacefully yielded up 
his spirit into his Father’s hands. And it is fair to say that, among all the 
writers of the New Testament, none places a greater emphasis on the 
social and even political dimensions of the gospel: In Luke’s render



ing of the beatitudes, it is not the “poor in spirit” who are blessed, but 
simply “the poor,” while in his corresponding list of “woes” the rich are 
informed that they had their comforts in this life and will have none 
in the Age to come; it would be difficult to imagine a more subversive 
social and economic manifesto than Mary’s “Magnificat”; Jesus in the 
synagogue at Nazareth proclaims the fulfillment of Isaiah’s prophecy 
regarding God’s rescue of the poor, the imprisoned, and the oppressed 
as his mission; the parable of the rich man and Lazarus is clearly a condemnation 
not simply of the former’s dissipations, but of his hoarding 
of the wealth he should be giving to the destitute; Jesus instructs the 
rich young ruler to sell his possessions and distribute the money to the 
poor not as an act of perfection in addition to what is needful for entry 
into the Kingdom, but as the one deed yet lacking in his pursuit of salvation; 
and Luke’s description in Acts of the early church’s communism 
of goods in Jerusalem is one that good Christians have striven heroically 
for the better part of two millennia to pretend not to notice. It is Luke 
who bequeathed to later Christian centuries the best-loved portrait of 
Jesus and of the early faith, and no writer in Christian history did more 
to make Christ and his gospel something immediate and even radiant 
in the Christian imagination; and yet, even so, we do not know who he 
actually was. As for the fourth Gospel—believed by many to have been 
written in the last decade of the first century and later attributed to 
John—its principal author (there were certainly more than one) was not 
the disciple of Jesus named John; many, however, believe that the book 
at least comes from a community descending from John’s mission and 
teachings, as the text seems to suggest at such places as chapter nineteen’s 
description of the piercing of the crucified Christ’s side, or at the 
close of the Gospel’s added “second conclusion” (the dreamlike coda 
of chapter twenty-one). Moreover, the author was clearly more concerned 
with making a complex theological statement about who Christ 
was than with offering an ostensibly documentary history. His Gospel 
does not unfold an historical narrative consistent with that of the 
other three: It depicts Christ’s ministry as stretching over at least three 


years, rather than the single year or less of the synoptic Gospels, and 
as comprising several visits to Judaea and Jerusalem rather than one; it 
seems to depict Jesus as a man in his forties (8:57), rather than as the 
younger man suggested by the historical chronology of Matthew and 
Luke; it rearranges the order of certain events, placing the cleansing of 
the Jerusalem Temple at the beginning rather than at the end of Christ’s 
ministry, and situating the crucifixion on the eve of the Passover rather 
than on the day itself (hence recording no Passover seder and so no Last 
Supper); it reports at enormous length prayers addressed to the Father 
by Jesus in private on the eve of the crucifixion, of which there could 
clearly have been no witness and in which there is no trace of the “agony 
of Gethsemane”; it describes Jesus as bearing his own cross to Golgotha, 
rather than Simon of Cyrene doing it for him; and so on. And, as 
a whole, it is obviously meant as a theological document rather than as a 
simple record of events. Hence, it is the most mysterious of the Gospels 
and its author the most mysterious of the evangelists. 

And so it goes. Of the “Pauline” letters that most scholars believe 
were not written by Paul himself, 2 Thessalonians, Ephesians, and 
Colossians do boast substantial coteries of scholars convinced (as a minority 
report) of Pauline authorship. But, while 2 Thessalonians echoes 
Paul’s style somewhat, it seems also to be consciously structured upon 
the genuine 1 Thessalonians; in many respects, also, it seems to be a late 
text, written in response to realities that arose after Paul’s time (in particular, 
the unexpectedly long delay of Christ’s parousia). What is more 
significant still, it contains eschatological claims of striking exactitude 
that are not only found nowhere else in the Pauline corpus, but that 
seem almost impossible to reconcile with the eschatological language 
and motifs of the indubitable letters. The overall impression of the letter 
is that it emanates from a somewhat idiosyncratic faction within 
the next generation or two of the early church, one in which an elaborate 
anagogy of the last days had begun to develop in place of the much 
simpler Pauline vision of an imminent return of Christ and transformation 
of the cosmos. But that may be only an impression. 


As for Ephesians and Colossians, it is generally recognized that the 
style and language of both letters differ somewhat from those of the 
definitely authentic letters, and that there are certain apparent novelties 
of theology and vocabulary in both. But arguments from consistency 
of style, which can always be misleading, are especially perilous in the 
case of authors who dictated their texts to amanuenses (as was, of necessity, 
the common practice in late antiquity), because those amanuenses 
may have exercised varying degrees of editorial discretion over the final 
products; and it is questionable that we actually possess a sample size of 
Pauline texts large enough to make such judgments wholly credible. Arguments 
from consistency of thought, moreover, can often fail to take 
into account just how much a single thinker’s “system” can develop over 
time. And there can be something insidiously circular about them as 
well: the scholar who has reached some conclusion regarding “how Paul 
thought” or “how Paul wrote,” based on a small number of texts interpreted 
by criteria that may be more arbitrary than that scholar realizes, 
then finds material in other canonically Pauline texts that seems at odds 
with that conclusion; so, rather than qualify his initial judgments, he 
dismisses the evidence. To take one obvious example, the authenticity of 
Colossians has often been denied by some scholars on the grounds that 
it seems to contain doctrines (a strong “moralism” of good works, for 
instance) incompatible with those found in the authentic letters. That, 
however, is where a trap may have been laid. What those scholars generally 
mean is that Colossians seems somewhat hard to reconcile with 
Paul’s authentic letters as interpreted by magisterial Protestant tradition. 
But the problem with this is that (pardon my bluntness) those traditional 
Protestant readings of Paul are demonstrably wrong. In the late 
Augustinian understanding of nature and grace that was exaggerated by, 
and then became the dominant grammar of, the sixteenth-century Reformation 
systems, Paul supposedly inveighed against belief in “justification” 
(meaning “unmerited extrinsic imputation of righteousness”) 
through “works” (meaning all kinds of human efforts, religious and 
moral), and insisted instead on justification through “faith” (meaning 


intellectual and emotional assent to Jesus as Lord and savior), by the 
grace of a “predestination” not based on any divine foreknowledge of 
human “merits.” But Paul taught nothing of the sort. Instead he taught 
that human beings cannot be “justified” (that is, “proved” or “made 
righteous”) by “works of the Law” (such as circumcision or kosher 
dietary practices), but only by a “faithfulness” that necessarily entails 
“works” of love—good deeds—in respect of which one will be judged 
and either rewarded or “punished” (or, better perhaps, “purged”). The 
power to perform such works is indeed a gift of grace, but for Paul it is 
one that unites us to God in a real “synergy” (such that we can become, 
as he likes to say, synergoi, “workers-together-with” God). Moreover, 
as for why some are “marked out in advance” (certainly not “predestined”) 
for God’s mission to the cosmos (for mission, that is, not for 
salvation), Romans 8:29 clearly describes God’s decision as contingent 
upon divine foreknowledge (as does 1 Peter 1:2, incidentally, and much 
theological tradition for centuries has gone through agonizing contortions 
trying to reverse the clear meaning of both verses). All of which 
is quite unsettling if one has been raised to believe in a stark antithesis 
between “works-righteousness” and faith, or between grace and works, 
or between divine and human merits, or between divine “sovereignty” 
and human effort; but Paul was not a Lutheran, or Calvinist, or even 
Augustinian. And so, when the Paul of the authentic letters is freed 
from the Paul of theological myth, it turns out that Colossians not only 
says nothing different on these matters at all, but does not even necessarily 
sound any distinctly different intonations. None of this is to 
deny the scrupulousness of most modern New Testament scholarship 
on these texts, but I would caution against accepting its verdicts too 
credulously. I confess that before I began this translation I had casually 
accepted the judgment that Ephesians and Colossians were not 
written by Paul; by the time I had finished it, I had not entirely come 
around to the opposite conclusion, but I had come to believe that many 
doubts regarding their authenticity are based on poorer stylistic evidence 
than is generally claimed, as well as on theological arguments 


that may say more about certain scholars’ theological presuppositions 
than about the rather unsystematic, late antique “system” of thought 
to which Paul actually held. There are genuine questions to be raised 
about the provenance of the letters—for instance, Ephesians frequently 
appears to have been written by someone who did not share Paul’s conviction 
that Christ’s return was imminent—but the solvency of many 
of those questions may turn out in the end to be rather thinner than has 
come to be assumed. Whatever the case, even if Ephesians and Colossians 
are not works of Paul himself, they are nevertheless very much of 
his “school” and expand faithfully upon his theological vision. Perhaps 
they were constructed from Pauline fragments by later editors, or were 
produced either by amanuenses working from particularly rudimentary 
dictations or by disciples under his directions, or were reconstructions 
of Pauline teachings by later disciples, or were simply better redacted 
and edited than the earlier letters; we simply cannot know. 

Other “pseudo-Pauline” letters, by contrast, truly are more remote 
in theological and moral sensibility. The three so-called Pastoral 
Epistles—1 and 2 Timothy and Titus—may well have been written by a 
single author, and in many respects they develop themes in Paul’s theology, 
such as the universal saving will of God in Christ; but they appear 
in some ways to be products of a period in the church’s institutional 
history somewhat later than Paul’s time (the early second century probably), 
seem stylistically unlike Paul’s unquestioned writings (the prose is 
better, the vocabulary more Hellenistic and less Septuagintal), and seem 
at odds with certain of Paul’s more astonishingly radical views, such as 
the equal spiritual dignity of masters and slaves, or of men and women 
(especially if, as textual evidence makes very likely, the famously dissonant 
passage of 1 Corinthians 14:34–35 is an interpolation). Even so, 
no less eminent a New Testament scholar than Luke Timothy Johnson 
has made a case for their Pauline authorship; and, while I do not find 
the argument convincing, I cannot quibble with its pedigree. I am quite 
prepared, moreover, to believe that all three of the pastorals contain real 
Pauline materials, revised and amplified upon by later followers. 


In the end, then, I suppose I would characterize the various skeptical 
arguments regarding the Pauline dubia thus: the cases against Ephesians 
and Colossians are not without weight, but are probably weaker 
than it has become common to assert; those against 2 Thessalonians are 
extremely (and to my mind decisively) strong; those against the Pastoral 
Epistles are nearly insuperable; but those against 1 Thessalonians and 
Philippians are so weak as to be practically self-refuting. 

As for Hebrews, in language, substance, and theological intention it 
could scarcely be more incandescently unlike the letters of Paul, though 
it is as brilliant as the greatest of them. It also exhibits a command of 
Greek that, as was generally recognized from the early centuries in educated 
Eastern Christian circles, is vastly beyond Paul’s own; in respect 
of style alone, to ascribe the letter to Paul is about as credible as ascribing 
a novel of Anatole France to Maurice Leblanc or a travel memoir 
of Patrick Leigh Fermor to Erskine Caldwell. But the text’s acceptance 
into the canon of the New Testament was delayed in some parts of the 
Christian world by uncertainty regarding its origin; so, at the very least, 
its eventual general attribution to Paul, however incredible, served to 
dispel doubts about its canonical propriety. Really, though, as Origen 
said in the third century, only God knows who truly wrote it. 

Of the other non-Pauline epistolary books, or Catholic Epistles, the 
letter of James comes nearest to giving us a clear picture of its author. 
At least, there is no reason to doubt that he was indeed the leader of the 
Christians in Jerusalem a decade or two after Christ; he may even have 
been, as tradition asserts, the brother of Jesus, though the letter makes 
no such claim. He clearly was a Jewish Christian writing to other Jewish 
Christians whom he still regarded as Jews, in some sense answerable 
to the Law of Moses (he even at one point, for what it is worth, refers 
to the Christian assembly not as an ekklēsia but as a synagogue, though 
most translations hide that fact from view). Regarding the identity of 
Judas—or as he is more customarily known, for delicacy’s sake, Jude— 
and regarding what exactly provoked him to write his short, exasper



ated letter, we know next to nothing. As for the three letters of John, 
they may have been the work of one man; at least the second and third 
seem to have been, both having been composed by someone identifying 
himself as “the Elder.” But most scholars properly deny that the author 
of any of them was the same John who wrote the fourth Gospel, or the 
John of Patmos who wrote Revelation, or John the Apostle. There are 
stylistic similarities, however, between the Gospel of John and the first 
of the Johannine letters, and it seems reasonable to suppose that, even 
if they were not the work of the same hand, they emanated from a close 
community of shared discourse, and that the latter text is written in a 
fairly deft imitation of the voice of the former. As for the two letters 
ascribed to Peter (the second being probably the latest New Testament 
text by a good margin), they were certainly written by two different 
authors, neither of whom was either the disciple of Jesus or the first 
leader of the church in Rome. Admittedly, some scholars have tried to 
argue for a kind of “indirect authenticity” for the first letter, suggesting 
that it may contain genuine teachings of the apostle communicated to, 
and then paraphrased by, a disciple fluent in Greek; but the case against 
authenticity is far stronger. No credible scholar argues for the authenticity 
of the second letter, however; it is an extremely late writing, incorporating 
a great deal of the Letter of Jude practically verbatim. 

I imagine that, for certain readers, the knowledge that the authors 
of some of the books of the New Testament were not in fact who they 
represented themselves as being must seem disturbing. It is unlikely, 
moreover, to assuage the distress of the aggrieved textual literalist to 
observe that such pseudonymy was a common and even marginally acceptable 
practice in late antiquity, and that religious and speculative 
texts were often written “in the voice” of authorities long dead or even 
merely legendary, and that—by antiquity’s more generous standards of 
“authenticity”—a text composed of redacted or rearranged materials 
by an author, or even merely composed by disciples of his school, could 
still be attributed to him. And perhaps it would be charitable to think 


that, in many cases, this authorial self-effacement may have been intended 
not so much as dissimulation as humility. 

A Note on Ancient Idioms and Present Tenses 

One exquisite example of the cunning of history at its most sardonic 
would have to be the divergent and yet complementary courses taken by 
the French and the English etymological derivations of the Latin verb 
traducere (meaning principally “to transfer”). Traduire means “to translate”; 
“to traduce” means “to slander,” “to malign,” “to betray by false 
witness.” That the two words share a single lineage is a fact whose lovely 
aptness could hardly be lost on anyone who has ever set out to make 
a good translation of a difficult text, most especially on anyone who 
has attempted to render ancient texts into modern tongues. At times, 
treachery seems almost inevitable. To begin with, it is nearly impossible 
to say with absolute certainty whether the dissimilarities one discovers 
between ancient and modern habits of speech reflect profound 
conceptual differences or only trivial differences in idiomatic convention. 
And then again, one quickly realizes, this may itself be a false distinction. 
Perhaps habits of speech and habits of thought are ultimately 
much the same thing. And perhaps, dangerous as it may be to fail to 
see the ways in which ancient manners of expressing ideas or telling 
stories resemble our own, it is a far more pernicious thing to fail to 
recognize and respect all the ways in which they are truly alien. I think 
I have come to the conclusion that what separates ancient from modern 
idioms is not simply a difference between distinct ways of saying the 
same things; rather, it is an essential incompatibility between distinct 
ways of seeing reality. The worlds we inhabit take shape from—and give 
shape to—the words we use. For this reason, it is my peculiar superstition 
that even the most seemingly impenetrable of ancient idioms ought 
to be regarded as inviolable by the translator. One should never transform 
an apparently obsolete metaphor or perplexing image into what 
one imagines to be its functional equivalent among the conventional ex



pressions of the present. If one is disposed to gloss an ancient text rather 
than to transfer it into modern language as exactly as possible, with all 
its jagged edges still sharp and forbidding, then it would be better just 
to leave the poor thing unmolested. 

This is true even, I would argue, of what might look like mere variances 
of grammatical structure. It seems an obvious choice, for instance, 
to write “the Father’s beloved Son” as the reasonable English 
rendering of a Greek phrase that would more literally be rendered as 
“the Son of the Father’s love.” But, when attempting to convey the text 
of scripture with as much immediacy as possible to those who know 
no Greek, one should consider whether, between two such phrases, 
the difference in the very relations of words—which, for instance, are 
substantives and which adjectives—might not grant us some small, 
maybe ineffable access to another way of understanding a whole host 
of conceptual relations. Even, however, if one is not quite that fastidious, 
one should never be willing to exchange the imagery preserved in 
ancient turns of phrase for expressions proper to our time, especially 
where this would mean sacrificing the obscure grandeur and mystery 
of poetic tropes for the drearily prosaic phrases to which modern languages 
are more naturally prone. Far too often, it seems to me, modern 
biblical translators presumptuously attempt to “explain” the meaning 
of texts that they should instead simply be trying to mirror as faithfully 
as possible. Where the original text gives the translator a concrete, 
delightfully naïve metaphor like “apple of his eye,” it is a crime against 
both good taste and hermeneutical discernment to write “his eyeball.” 
Where the original text speaks of “many waters,” the translator absolutely 
must never write “a great quantity of water.” Where the text tells 
us that “he was full of years,” it is an inexcusable vulgarity to write “he 
was very old.” Where the text speaks of “David’s seed,” it is not only 
an unseemly prudery to write “David’s descendants” but also an act 
of crass indifference to a vast range of metaphorical associations: husbandry 
and harvests, fruition and fertility, roots and flowers, abundance 


and growth, and so on. Nor should we allow ourselves to imagine that 
the beauty and poetry of these deeply embedded metaphors and finely 
wrought turns of phrase are illusory, effects not of anything intrinsic 
to the language of the texts but only of their exotic strangeness to us 
today. Poetry is more primordial to culture than is prose, and poetic 
apprehension more original and natural than the more starkly calculative 
way of seeing things reflected in our “developed” tongues, and the 
world that inhabits and crystallizes within the language of one age is not 
the same as that which exists in another. All the subtle interweavings 
and disjunctions that compose the world’s phenomenal and conceptual 
orders are established and sustained in grammar and semantics, metaphor 
and metonymy. Hence the poetry of ancient idioms must always 
be jealously guarded and preserved by the translator, so that the worlds 
they figure forth are never lost. To render the still-living metaphors of 
ancient texts into the drab, denatured language and dead metaphors 
that shape and sustain our modern perspective is philistinism; to pursue 
“dynamic equivalence” is pure barbarism. 

On the other hand, I have to admit, equally dangerous for the translator 
is to fail to grasp not the unexpected differences, but rather the 
unexpected similarities between the distant past and the present. At 
least I have found this to be so in the matter of certain narrative conventions, 
especially those regarding the use of tenses. I am not the first 
translator of the New Testament to have rendered all the Greek present 
tense verbs in the original as English present tense verbs. In fact, the 
committee of scholars who produced the King James Version did the 
same, for the most part—though many modern readers may be too distracted 
by the older, nonsibilant, third-person-singular constructions 
to notice that when “Jesus saith” something or “goeth” somewhere, he 
does so in a kind of abstract narrative now. Still, some in the modern 
guild of New Testament scholars take exception to the practice. This 
is largely because they have been indoctrinated to think it somehow incorrect. 
For over half a century, seminarians and divinity school students 
have been taught to believe that the constant but irregular use 


of present tense verbs in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and John (it 
occurs very rarely in Luke) is actually both regular and internally coherent 
and that it reflects a system of tenses different from that of modern 
European languages; hence, allegedly, the practice would not have 
seemed to first-century listeners to or readers of the texts to be shifts 
from past to present at all, let alone incongruous shifts. Those seminarians 
and divinity students have also been taught that such usage follows 
naturally from the way tenses originally developed in Indo-European 
tongues, that is, as indices not of the temporal locations of actions but 
rather of their temporal quality, or “action types” (Aktionsarten). Thus, 
when reading the Gospels, we will (or, in theory, should) find that the 
aorist is used strictly to indicate a punctiliar action, the perfect to indicate 
(obviously) an action in a perfected state, and the present to indicate 
an iterative or durative action. Thus the present tense, when 
used in a narrative of past events, supposedly sometimes has an imperfect 
force, sometimes is used of actions that continue into the present, 
sometimes refers to repeated actions, sometimes describes a “gnomic” 
activity that is timelessly the case, and so forth. And those same seminarians 
and divinity students have then been taught that the historical 
present is in fact used also to indicate Aspekt, “temporal aspect,” which 
is to say the way an action appears from the point of view of the agents 
in the story (continuous or completed, principally). This last, at least, 
has the advantage of being an unfalsifiable assertion, since, of course, 
all actions in a historical narrative are (or were) present events from the 
perspective of those who were there at the time. 

The problems with such claims are, alas, large and numerous. The 
most immediately obvious is that the theory, enunciated thus, describes 
a systematic use of tenses that simply is not reflected in the New Testament 
texts. “They crucify him,” for instance, clearly describes neither a 
durative nor an iterative action. In fact, tenses are used so haphazardly 
in the Gospels that one action is often related in a confusion of tenses, 
the present alongside the aorist or the perfect. As for Aspekt, it is true 
that many very ancient tongues used tenses as indications of types or 


states of actions, but the common Greek of the first century did not. 
And, once again, the actual texts, apart from a few individual verses 
(Matthew 20:30, for example), prove wholly refractory to the theory. 
In the Gospels, various tenses are typically combined utterly unsystematically 
in a single episode, and even in a single sentence, clause, 
or phrase. Moreover, while gnomic uses of the present tense are fairly 
common to all languages—if I say, “I write for a living,” I do not mean 
to suggest that I am writing in the very moment of the utterance—this 
has no bearing on the issue of how to render descriptions of past actions. 
The sentence “My wife knew that I write for a living” is comprehensible 
because my present is still contained within the frame of what 
she knew about me then. I really ought not, however, write a sentence 
like “Cicero knew that Plato lives in Athens” for the obvious reason 
that neither of the subjects in that sentence still belongs to a present to 
which I may meaningfully refer. And the koinē Greek of Graeco-Roman 
antiquity possessed little greater “aspectual” temporal plasticity than 
this. Ultimately, all these explanations of the New Testament’s “historical 
present” involve a very misty understanding of the different epochs 
of the Greek tongue. It was around the middle of the last century, I 
suspect, that a number of New Testament scholars began to borrow 
the insights of classical philologists—most notably, perhaps, Kurt von 
Fritz—regarding the interesting truth that early Indo-European languages 
employed tenses to indicate the types rather than the times of 
actions, and seized on this information as a way of exculpating the evangelists 
as much as possible of any charge of literary infelicity or grammatical 
laxity. Perhaps Matthew, Mark, and John were not slapdash in 
their use of tenses after all, but were rather obeying a rigorously precise 
method of historical exposition standard in the first century. Sadly, the 
texts still obstinately refuse to comply with the theory. And, frankly, 
it was a mistake ever to imagine they should. What those philologists 
were describing was a stratum of Greek much more ancient than first-
century koinē, and what they were calling attention to were narrative 
practices that were, as von Fritz was careful to point out, already in de



cay before the time of Xenophon. By the period of the New Testament, 
Greek verbs were more or less invariably bound to temporal designations, 
as in modern European tongues. If anything remains of the older 
historical present in the New Testament, it is in the attenuated form 
of the occasional use of a present tense as something like a durative 
imperfect (such as Matthew 2:22), where we today would generally use 
a preterit or atemporal infinitive construction (at least when writing). 
Even then, such verses are emblematic not of any large and consistent 
narrative practice but only of a few random idiomatic habits of speech. 

The correct, simpler explanation of the shifting tenses in late antique 
Greek historical narratives is that they reflect a perfectly ordinary 
practice found in just about any language that possesses tenses at 
all, including ours. Yes, there was and is such a thing as the Greek “historical 
present.” There is also, however, an English “historical present,” 
and in this translation I have simply rendered the former into the latter. 
In one notable respect, of course, the standard view is correct: In late 
antiquity, the effect of the use of the historical present on a text’s audience 
(as most persons listened to rather than read texts) would not have 
been jarring, but this is not because it would have been grammatically 
inconspicuous. The present would have been heard as the present, but 
would nevertheless have seemed perfectly natural in context. We do the 
same thing today; we simply tend to limit the practice to spoken stories. 

I went to my friend to get him to pay the money he owed me. When 
I got there, I saw his lights were on and I heard music playing. So I 
go to the door and knock, but nothing happens, except that the 
music suddenly gets softer and then stops altogether. I knock again, 
more loudly, but still nothing happens. And then I see the curtain 
on one of the porch windows move ever so slightly, and can see an 
eye peering at me. Now I was beginning to get angry. 

We move effortlessly and intuitively between temporal perspectives, 
wholly unsystematically but perfectly coherently, sensing when the 


action spontaneously invites a more immediate descriptive language 
and when the action should drift back into its more remote temporal 
frame. Admittedly, we find this fluidity of tense in the written texts 
of late antiquity much more than in written texts today but, in that 
age, a written text was also usually an oral text, having been dictated to 
an amanuensis and intended for reading out loud. Hence, the less refined 
the genre or more colloquial the style, the more a text preserved 
the cadences and usages of common speech. Luke almost never used 
the historical present principally because he was the most urbane and 
“scholarly” of the evangelists, engaged in writing a treatise rather than 
in merely telling tales. One might describe his style as “syngrammatic” 
and that of the other three as “phrastic.” And, indeed, this I offer as my 
own small, humble contribution to the great inventory of obscure philological 
terminology: Rather than continuing to propound an elaborate 
but empirically false account of the historical present, in order to 
make certain texts seem more polished than they are, we should speak 
instead of the difference between syngrammatic and phrastic textual 
types. 

All this said, however, and to recur to my initial observations, it remains 
the case that mistaking the familiar for the strange is nowhere 
near so destructive an error as mistaking the strange for the familiar. 
One temptation to which the translator of scripture can all too easily 
fall prey is, out of an excessive passion for concision, to try to convert 
an ambiguous term from the distant past into a single convenient item 
of today’s parlance even if this means sacrificing important nuances. It 
seems to me that in such circumstances it is always wiser to err on the 
side of prolixity instead. Consider, for instance, a single word found in 
Acts 17:22. My version reads thus: “And Paul stood in the middle of the 
Areopagus and said, ‘Athenian men, I observe how exceedingly reverent 
you are toward the daemonian (δεισιδαιμονέστερος, deisidaimonesteros) 
in everything.’” I feel a certain sympathy for those who recoiled 
from this rendering, but I would defend it, if not to the death, at least 


to the point of spoiling a conversation over dinner. I have never liked 
either of the standard alternatives for the most difficult term used in 
the verse, deisidaimonesteros: neither the more benign “exceedingly religious” 
nor the more censorious “exceedingly superstitious.” The latter 
makes no sense here in any event, despite its use in some translations. 
It is clear that Paul is not berating the Athenians for their superstitions, 
but rather commending them for their natural piety, so that he can then 
appropriate their altar to the unknown god for his message. But, even 
in other contexts, the term “superstitious” seems wrong, if only because 
we use that word disdainfully about beliefs in things we think fantastic; 
in the ancient world, by contrast, to be δεισιδαίμων (deisidaimōn) 
was to be excessively afraid of numinous forces that were thought to 
be very real, but not as dangerous or malicious as was often imagined. 
Again, though, Paul is using the word in a complimentary sense. Even 
for that, though, “religious” strikes me as an inadequate rendering. For 
one thing, the word refers explicitly not to God or the gods above the 
heavens. Neither Paul nor Luke would have used the word to indicate 
the sort of devotion appropriate to faith in the one God Most High 
from whom all things come; neither would most pagans have done so. 
The word has to do, rather, with the whole sacred realm of powers pervading 
this cosmos and mediating between it and the exalted, super-
celestial realm of the truly divine, τὸ θεῖον (to theion). The secondary, 
more proximate “divine” orders of daimōnes—genii, longaevi, aerial 
sprites, the ethereal and spiritual forces pervading nature, the rulers of 
the planetary spheres, the angelic or daemonic governors of the nations, 
the entire glittering and multifarious host of spirits and angels and elemental 
powers—composed a whole unseen hierarchy of gentle and terrible 
and glorious and mysterious presences uniting the realm of generation 
and decay here below with the eternity of the empyrean beyond 
the turning spheres above. What Paul is almost certainly not saying 
to the Athenians in the Areopagus sermon is that they are already aware 
of the true nature of God Most High; hence his claim that it is precisely 


the god they do not know that will prove to be the true God. I should 
note, moreover, that Paul himself certainly believed in the reality of the 
daemonian realm. It was a central tenet of his Gospel that it is precisely 
these powers that Christ has subdued, not necessarily in order wholly 
to destroy them or condemn them, but so as to place them in proper 
order under his feet—even (to use the pseudo-Pauline or Pauline language 
of Colossians 1:19–20) to reconcile them to himself—so that the 
entire spiritual and natural totality of the cosmos may be surrendered 
to the Father, that God might be all in all (1 Corinthians 15:25–28). All 
this being so, it seems to me that no translation should allow the presence 
of the “daemonian” dimension in Paul’s reported language to go 
unrepresented. 

The Realm of the Dead 

There is more, however. Fully to appreciate all the ways in which 
the late antique vision of reality differed from ours today, one must 
look not only at the physical and spiritual features of the living world 
as it was then imagined but also at those still more mysterious dimensions 
lying beyond the borders of life, in the region of death or in the 
Age of the world that is coming. If I may dilate upon some remarks 
I made in my footnote to Luke 16:22–23: My version of that passage 
reads thus: “And it happened that the poor man died and was carried off 
by the angels into the Vale of Abraham (εἰς τὸν κόλπον Ἀβραάμ, eis 
ton kolpon Abraam); but the rich man also died and was entombed. And 
lifting up his eyes in Hades, being in torment, he sees Abraham far 
off and Lazarus in his vales (ἐν τοῖς κόλποις αὐτοῦ, en tois kolpois 
avtou).” My most obvious departure from convention here is the 
choice to render κόλπος (kolpos) not as the familiar “bosom” but as 
the aggressively unusual “vale.” The original Greek phrase, I should 
note, is somewhat odd. “Bosom” may, by the first century, have been 
the far more common meaning of kolpos, but it was never the exclusive 
meaning. And, while the phrase “kolpos Abraam” might seem to reflect 


some recognized idiom of the time, we have no other evidence of its 
use from earlier or contemporary sources. There is at most a fragment 
of papyrus from Alexandria, probably from about the same general era 
as Acts, that mentions the kolpos of all three of Israel’s patriarchs; but, 
of course, that merely makes the image more obscure, since three men 
rarely share a single torso. Surely one should assume the phrase means 
something like “in their midst,” or “among them,” or “in their special 
place,” or “under their sheltering care,” or even (to risk a wild conjecture) 
“in their vale.” Then, from some centuries after the time of Acts, 
there is a single Mishnaic phrase that might refer to the same image, in 
the tractate Kiddushin (72b), where the third-century figure Adda bar 
Ahava is described as seated within “Abraham’s bosom.” But this, it is 
generally believed, is a usage without deep roots in antiquity, perhaps 
borrowed from the Christians, and unilluminating with regard to the 
Greek phrase used by Luke back in the first century. It is possible, I 
grant, that Luke used kolpos here as an equivalent of the Hebrew cheyq, 
which is to say either the breast or the fold in a man’s garment located at 
the level of his chest. But Luke did not write in Hebrew or Aramaic, and 
he lived in a Hellenistic and Roman Mediterranean world, and he used 
its language, and he conceived of reality in the terms common to his 
time. And, seen within that picture of things, the rich man and Lazarus 
after their deaths should not be regarded as occupying, respectively, the 
hell and the heaven of later Christian imagination. This would be sheer 
anachronism. Rather, they occupy two distinct regions of the one realm 
of the dead (Hades or Sheol). As all good scholars of late antique Judaism, 
Christianity, or paganism are aware, in the first century the most 
common picture of the afterlife, shared by practically everyone, was of 
a region of the dead in which there are places both of torment and of 
beatitude. The kolpos Abraam—however one translates the phrase—is 
something like the Elysian fields of Greek myth, a place of repose in 
the postmortem realm of souls reserved exclusively for the good and 
the just. Such is, after all, very much the picture provided by 1 Enoch, 


which first-century Jews and Christians alike tended to regard as a truly 
prophetic work and which exercised an immense influence over Christian 
belief in the first few generations of the church (but I shall come 
to that presently). 

It is worth noting as well that, whereas verse 22 speaks in the singular 
of Abraham’s kolpos, verse 23 speaks instead in the plural of his 
κόλποι (kolpoi). For me, at least as regards consistency of imagery, this 
change in number militates against any preference for a physiological 
rather than a topological understanding of the term. “Inward parts?” 
Perhaps, but that is not quite the same thing as the image of Lazarus 
resting his head upon the chest and within the embrace of father 
Abraham. One has to understand that the word kolpos really did have 
an enormous range of uses, almost none of which were metaphorical, 
strictly speaking, but some of which were situated at the more poetical 
end of the rhetorical spectrum. The word originally meant anything 
folded or enclosed, and as a physiological designation could be used 
for just about any encompassing posture or part of the human anatomy 
(use your imagination). It could also, however, mean a purse or a fold 
in fabric, and as a word for the pectoral fold in a man’s garment, in 
which he might carry money or papers, it acquired a special association 
with the chest or bosom on which a head might tenderly be laid. Then 
again, it could also mean a lap, so perhaps we should think of Lazarus 
sitting in the lap of Abraham, or (for that matter) of the divine Son 
sitting in the lap of the Father (John 1:18). In either case, the image 
would be a fetchingly sweet one, I suppose. But the word also meant 
other kinds of enclosed spaces, like bays or gulfs or valleys, especially 
when employed for evocative effect. Luke was clearly a man of refined 
literary tastes and education, surely with some training in rhetoric, and 
there would have been nothing extraordinary in his giving his narrative 
a touch of lyrical color by using the somewhat more ornate phrase. 
He is relating a fable about the lands of the dead, after all. For the educated, 
the word had a long literary pedigree. Pindar, for instance (Olympian 
Odes 9.87), speaks of the victory that came “to Epharmostos in the 


Valley of Nemea”: Νεμέας Ἐφαρμοστῷ κατὰ κόλπον (Nemeas 
Epharmostōi kata kolpon). Thucydides (Peloponnesian War 2.99) speaks of 
a place that “even now it is still called the Pierian Valley”: ἔτι καὶ νῦν 
Πιερικὸς κόλπος καλείται (eti kai nyn Pierikos kolpos kaleitai). The 
plural form used in verse 23, moreover, strikes me as especially reminiscent 
of Sophocles (Antigone 1121) speaking of “the Valleys of Eleusinian 
Demeter, common to all”: παγκοίνοις Ἐλευσινίας Δηοῦς ἐν κόλποις 
(pa[n]gkoinois Elevsinias Dēous kolpois). None of this, however, 
would have been decisive for me if not for what I take to be an obvious 
source of Luke’s imagery. 

This, as it happens, is the real point of this excursus. It is difficult 
to exaggerate how influential the intertestamental “Noachic” literature 
was for the Jews and then Christians of the first century. On the whole, 
too many New Testament scholars over the years have neglected to 
assess properly not only the three centuries of Hellenistic culture in 
which Jewish culture had been steeping by the time of Christ and the 
apostolic church but also the profound importance for the early church 
(quite explicit at numerous places in the New Testament) of the angelology, 
demonology, cosmology, and eschatology of texts like 1 Enoch 
and Jubilees. Too often in the past, the first-century Judaism of pious 
New Testament and early-church studies has been a fantastic abstraction, 
decocted from equal parts the biblical prophets and later Rabbinic 
Judaism, while the pervasive Greek and Persian and apocalyptic and 
other influences of that remarkably and gloriously culturally promiscuous 
age have been ignored or treated as extraneous minor features of 
late antique Judaism, as well as (of course) corruptions. No one, however, 
who knows how intermixed the cultures of the Hellenistic world 
really were should be surprised by the suggestion that Luke’s picture 
of the realm of the dead looks very much like the one that was, by his 
time, common to just about every Mediterranean and Near Eastern 
culture. Much less, however, should it surprise anyone to learn that 
Luke’s imagery resembles that of the Book of Enoch (from which, I 
think it likely, it was at least partially drawn). This is most clear in what 


remains of the original Greek text, since the complete Ge’ez translation 
preserved in the Ethiopian Bible contains an error that obscures 
some of the original meaning. (The adjective κοῖλος, koilos, which 
means “hollow,” is mistaken for κάλος, kalos, which means “lovely.”) In 
“The Book of the Watchers,” the first section in Enoch, chapter 22 describes 
the region of the dead as being set among a chain of mountains 
and comprising four “hollow places” or “vales”—τόποι κοῖλοι (topoi 
koiloi), κοιλώματα (koilōmata)—entirely separated—ἐχωρίσθησαν 
(echōristhēsan)—from one another; one of these vales is full of light and 
flowing water, while the other three are dry, deep, and dark. Here the 
dead await the judgment, the righteous in the place of light, with its 
refreshing springs, the various classes of the unrighteous in the places 
of suffering and darkness. Here too, I believe, or in some very similar 
topography of Hades, Luke has placed Lazarus and the rich man: the 
one in the Vale or Vales of Abraham, the other in a dark, dry, fiery valley 
of suffering. 

The Life of the Age to Come 

Even these observations, however, can convey only a small part of 
the larger vision of existence—cosmos, life, death, salvation, spiritual 
beings, creation, the end of time—in which the New Testament lives 
and moves and has its being. Let me also dilate here, then, upon some 
observations made more fleetingly above. A great deal of Christian biblical 
scholarship over the past few centuries has tended so to distort 
our notions of the apostolic age as to create an entirely fictional early 
Christianity. Not that this is especially shocking: it is perfectly natural 
that Christians should mistake the version of the faith they know for 
the only version that has ever existed, and this was especially understandable 
before historical and classical scholarship on late antiquity 
had become as plentifully available as it now is. But, again, this has 
always inevitably entailed the simultaneous creation of an equally fictional 
late antique Judaism, especially in much older Protestant scholarship: 
a fantastic “purified” Judaism situated outside cultural history, 


purged of every Hellenistic and Persian “alloy,” stripped of those shining 
hierarchies of spirits and powers and morally ambiguous angels and 
demi-angelic nefilim that had been incubated in the intertestamental 
literature; a Judaism largely and miraculously unaffected even by those 
Septuagintal books absent from the later Masoretic text of the Jewish 
Bible and precociously conformed to early mediaeval Rabbinic orthodoxy—
and, even then, to a fantasy Rabbinic orthodoxy, one robbed of 
its native genius and variety and then imperiously reduced to a kind of 
Protestantism without Jesus. No such Judaism ever existed, either in 
the days of Christ and the apostles or in any other period, but it has enjoyed 
a long and vigorous life in Protestant dogmatics and biblical criticism. 
Nor, in the late antique Graeco-Roman world, was there some 
sort of impermeable cultural or intellectual partition between pagan 
and Jewish thought, or between the “philosophy” of the Greeks and 
the “pure” covenantal piety of the Jews. It was an age of amazing intellectual 
adventurousness and openness. In much of the Graeco-Roman 
world and at its edges, Jews and gentiles freely learned from one another, 
influenced one another, belonged to one and the same diverse-
but-integrated, imaginative, and speculative atmosphere. And it was an 
atmosphere so remote from us today, with our anachronistic and narrow 
notions of what constituted ancient Christian or Jewish or even 
pagan forms of thought, that we often scarcely suspect how vastly differently 
we use the terms we share with late antique believers. There 
are no more striking examples of this, as I have noted, than the ways in 
which modern Christians tend to interpret the New Testament’s use of 
the words “spirit” (πνεῦμα, pnevma), “soul” (ψυχή, psychē), and “flesh” 
(σάρξ, sarx), or the theologies of resurrection that attach to them. 

We are, of course, far removed from the world of the first century, 
and so it is hard for us, when we encounter words like “soul” and 
“spirit” in the New Testament, not to see them as having only very 
vague imports, apposite only to hazily ill-defined concepts or spectrally 
impalpable objects. We almost invariably etherealize or moralize their 
meanings in ways that entirely obscure the picture of reality they origi



nally reflected. We do not, after all, envisage the earth we live on today 
as divided from the several heavenly spheres above by the lunary sphere, 
nor the aerial realm of generation and decay here below as separated 
by that sphere from the imperishable ethereal realm of spiritual forces 
there above. For us today, even words like “heavenly” (ἐπουράνιος, 
epouranios) and “earthly” (χοϊκός, choïkos) convey practically nothing 
of the exquisite cosmology—at once concretely physical and vibrantly 
spiritual—in which the authors of the New Testament lived. And inevitably, 
when we read of “spirit,” “soul,” and “flesh” in the New Testament, 
the specter of Descartes (largely unnoticed by us) imposes itself 
between us and the text; we have next to no sense of the implications, 
physical and metaphysical, that such words had in the age of the early 
church. Even “flesh” becomes an almost perfect cipher for us, not only 
because we lack the perspective of ancient persons but also because 
of the drastic oversimplifications of Christian tradition with which we 
have been burdened; we think we know—just know in our bones—that 
the early Christians unambiguously affirmed the inherent goodness 
of the material body, and that surely, then, Christian scripture could 
never have meant to employ the word “flesh” literally in order to designate 
something bad. So, as we read, either we choose not to notice that 
nearly every use of the word in the text is openly opprobrious and the 
rest merely neutral or we acknowledge this but tell ourselves that the 
word is being used metaphorically or as a lexical synecdoche for some 
larger conceptual construct like “the mortal life in the flesh, stained 
with sin and lying under divine judgment.” We deceive ourselves. As 
I said earlier, in the New Testament “flesh” does not mean “sinful nature” 
or “humanity under judgment” or even “fallen flesh.” It just means 
“flesh,” in the bluntly physical sense, and it often has a negative connotation 
because flesh, belonging to the realm of mutability and mortality, 
can form only a body of death. Hence, according to Paul, the body 
of the resurrection is not one of flesh and blood animated by “soul,” 
but is rather a new reality altogether, an entirely spiritual body beyond 


composition or dissolution. And this is how his language would have 
been understood by his contemporaries. 

To grasp this, one really does have to take leave of the Cartesian 
picture with almost violent peremptoriness. One must cease to think 
that only the material body possesses extension in any sense; one must 
learn not to treat words like “soul,” “spirit,” and “mind” as interchangeable 
terms for one and the same thing; and one must most emphatically 
not think of soul or spirit or mind as necessarily incorporeal in the 
absolute sense of lacking all extension or consistency. And one must be 
especially conscious that the words pnevma and psychē were not nebulous 
terms in the religious or speculative vocabulary of the Hellenized 
world; neither in most cases were they likely to be confused with one 
another, as “spirit” and “soul” can be in modern English, because they 
were usually used as precise names for two distinct cosmic and metaphysical 
principles that, in some systems of thought, were practically 
antithetical to one another. In different eras, places, and schools, admittedly, 
each of these words carried somewhat different, if never entirely 
unrelated, connotations; but each always had a clear significance. And 
Paul used both terms in ways that were very much part of the philosophical 
and scientific lingua franca of his age. In this broader system 
of ideas, “soul”—psychē or anima—was chiefly the life-principle proper 
to the realm of generation and decay, the “psychical” or “animal” 
substance that endows sublunary organisms with the power of self-
movement and growth, though only for a short time. And the bodily 
life produced by this “animating” principle was understood as strictly 
limited to the aerial and terrestrial sphere. It could exist nowhere else, 
and most certainly not in the aether of the heavenly places. It was too 
frail, too ephemeral, too much bound to mutability and transience. 
“Spirit,” by contrast—pnevma or spiritus—was quite different, a kind of 
life inherently indestructible and incorruptible, not bound to death or 
to the irrational faculties of brute nature and not confined to any single 
cosmic sphere. It could survive anywhere and could move with com



plete liberty among all the spiritual realms, as well as in the material 
world here below. Spirit was something subtler but also stronger, more 
vital, more glorious than the worldly elements of a coarse corruptible 
body compounded of earthly soul and material flesh. Thus too the word 
“spirits” was commonly used to refer to all those rational agencies and 
entities who populated the cosmos but were not bound to vegetal or 
animal bodies: lesser celestial gods, daemons, angels, nefilim, devils, or 
what have you. These beings enjoyed a life not dependent on the lower 
elements, the στοιχεῖα (stoicheia), or the intrinsically dissoluble combinations 
thereof. 

Even so, none of these beings was typically considered to be wholly 
incorporeal, at least as we would use that word today. The common belief 
of most educated persons was that the only reality that was bodiless 
in the absolute sense was God, or the highest divine principle. Everything 
else, even spirits, had some kind of body, because all of them 
were irreducibly local. The bodies of spirits may have been at once 
more invincible and more mercurial than those with an animal constitution, 
but they were also, if in a peculiarly exalted sense, still physical. 
Many thought them to be composed from, say, the aether, or the “quintessence,” 
above, the “spiritual” substance that constitutes the celestial 
regions beyond the moon. Many also identified that substance with 
the pnevma—the “wind” or “breath”—that stirs all things, a universal 
quickening force subtler even than the air it moves. It was generally believed, 
moreover, that many of these ethereal or spiritual beings were 
not only embodied but visible to the naked eye. The stars overhead 
were thought to be divine or angelic intelligences (as we see reflected 
in James 1:17 and 2 Peter 2:10–11). And it was a conviction common to 
a good many pagans and Jews alike that the ultimate destiny of great 
or especially righteous souls was to be granted astral bodies and to be 
elevated into the heavens to shine as stars (as we see in Daniel 12:3 and 
Wisdom 3:7, and as may be reflected in 1 Corinthians 15:30–41). The 
“blissful abode” of the righteous was literally overhead, up in the shin



ing aether beyond the moon (see, for example, Orphic Hymn 37, or even 
Aeneid VI.743–751). In the Jewish and Christian beliefs of the age, in 
fact, there were no fully incorporeal angels—certainly not the angels of 
Thomism, for example, who are pure form devoid of prime matter and 
therefore each its own unique species. In fact, it was a central tenet of 
the most influential Jewish and Christian angelology of the age, derived 
as it was from the intertestamental Noachic literature, that angels had 
actually sired children—the monstrous nefilim—with human women. 

It is arguable, in fact, that no school of pagan thought, early or 
late, perhaps not even Platonism, really had a perfectly clear concept 
of any substance entirely without extension. For Plotinus, for instance, 
“soul” was “incorporeal,” but not in the way we might assume; while the 
soul in Plotinus’s system was not susceptible of “material” magnitude, 
and hence could contain all forms without spatial extension (Enneads 
2.4.11), it was still “incorporeal” only in the sense that it possessed so 
subtle a nature that it could wholly permeate material bodies without 
displacing their discrete material constituents (Enneads 4.7.82). Neither 
“spirit” nor “soul” was anything quite like a Cartesian “mental substance.” 
Each, no less than “flesh and blood,” was thought of as a kind 
of element. “Spirit,” for instance, in certain antique schools of natural 
philosophy and medicine, could be defined as that subtle influence or 
ichor that pervades the veins and passages of a living body and, among 
other things, endows it with sense perception—by filling, for instance, 
the nerves or porous passages between eye and brain. For many persons, 
in fact, this vital influence was literally “physically” continuous 
with the “wind” that fills the world and the “breath” that swells our 
chests. This is almost unimaginable for us, of course. When today, for 
instance, we try to make sense of John 3:8, we are frustrated by the absence 
in English of any word adequate to all the meanings present in the 
original’s use of pnevma. My attempt at a rendering, whose inadequacy 
I sheepishly acknowledge, is: “The spirit respires (τὸ πνεῦμα . . . πνεῖ, 
to pnevma . . . pnei) where it will, and you hear its sound but you do not 


know where it comes from or where it goes; such is everyone born of 
the Spirit (ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος, ek tou pnevmatos).” I could, however, 
in each instance have written not “spirit” for pnevma, but “wind” or 
“breath”; instead of “respires” for pnei, I could have written “blows.” 
Perhaps, then: “The wind blows where it will . . . such is everyone born 
from the wind.” Or, perhaps, “The breath breathes where it will . . . 
such is everyone born from the breath.” Happily, I spared the reader 
that. But, still, all these various possible meanings would have been 
audibly present in the text for its author and for those who heard it 
read aloud in the earliest Christian communities. Even if we are aware 
of this, however, we are still likely to read the verse as a kind of play on 
words—at most, an illustrative simile. And, needless to say, our fully 
formed theological concept of the Holy Spirit disposes us, on grounds 
of piety alone, to see it as such. But it probably should not really be 
taken as wordplay at all. If we could hear the language of pnevma with 
late antique, Graeco-Roman ears, our sense of the text’s meaning would 
not be that of two utterly distinct concepts—one physical and one mystical—
only metaphorically entangled with one another by dint of a verbal 
equivocity; rather, we would almost surely hear only a single concept 
expressed univocally through a single word, a concept in which the 
physical and the mystical would remain undifferentiated. To be born 
of spirit (or Spirit), to be born of the wind of life, to be born of the 
divine and cosmic breath vivifying and uniting all things—it would all 
make perfectly simple, straightforward, physical sense to us. Whatever 
the case, though, this much is certain: it was widely believed in late antiquity 
that, in human beings, flesh and soul and spirit were all present 
in some degree; spirit was merely the element that was imperishable by 
nature and constitution. 

This is why I complained above about those traditional but catastrophic 
translations of 1 Corinthians 15:35–54 that render Paul’s distinction 
between the “psychical body” (σῶμα ψυχικόν, sōma psychikon) 
and the “spiritual body” (σῶμα πνευματικόν, sōma pnevmatikon) as 
a distinction between “natural” and “spiritual” bodies. The very cate



gory of the “natural” is otiose here, as would be any opposition between 
natural and supernatural modes of life, or radically discontinuous natural 
and supernatural realms; that is a conceptual division that belongs 
to other, much later, much more intellectually unfortunate ages. For 
Paul, both psychical and spiritual bodies were in the proper sense natural 
objects, and both in fact are found in nature as it now exists. He 
distinguished, therefore, not between “natural” and “spiritual” bodies, 
but only between “terrestrial bodies” (σώματα ἐπίγεια, sōmata epigeia) 
and “celestial bodies” (σώματα ἐπουράνια, sōmata epourania). 
And this, again, is a distinction not between natural and supernatural 
life, but merely between incommiscible “natural” states: “incorruptibility” 
and “decay,” “glory” and “dishonor,” “power” and “weakness.” 
In speaking of the body of the resurrection as a “spiritual” rather than 
“psychical” body, Paul is saying that, in the Age to come, when the 
whole cosmos will be transfigured into a reality appropriate to spirit, 
beyond birth and death, the terrestrial bodies of those raised to new life 
will be transfigured into the sort of celestial bodies that now belong to 
the angels: incorruptible, immortal, purged of every element of flesh 
and blood and (perhaps) soul. For, as Paul quite clearly states, “flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does perish-
ability inherit imperishability.” And, of course, he also says that those 
who are in Christ have been made capable of this transformation precisely 
because, in the body of the risen Lord, the life of the Age to come 
has already appeared in glory: “So it has also been written, ‘The first 
man Adam came to be a living soul,’ and the last Adam a life-making 
spirit. . . . The first man out of the earth, earthly; the second man out 
of heaven. As the earthly man, so also those who are earthly; and, as 
the heavenly, so also those who are heavenly; and, just as we have borne 
the image of the earthly man, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly 
man.” This is for Paul nothing less than the transformation of the 
psychical composite into the spiritual simplex—the metamorphosis of 
the mortal fleshly body that belongs to soul into the immortal fleshless 
body that belongs to spirit: “We shall be changed. For this perishable 


thing must clothe itself in imperishability, and this mortal thing must 
clothe itself in immortality.” 

It is not so much Christian dogma as hardened habits of thought 
and imagination that make Paul’s language so impenetrable to modern 
Christians. No matter how clear Paul’s pronouncements are, the 
plain meaning of his words still seems “pagan” or “Platonic” or “semignostic” 
to modern Christian ears, and of course all of those things 
are taken as very bad. Thus the picture persists of resurrection, even 
in Paul’s thought, as something along the lines of a reconstruction and 
reanimation of the earthly body in an only slightly more durable state. 
This is deeply problematic, since “animated” is arguably already a synonym 
for psychikon, and since it is, historically speaking, probably impossible 
that Paul thought of the spiritual body as a kind of articulated 
organism, consisting in an extrinsic liaison between something animated 
(a revived and improved material body) and something animating 
(an extrinsic life-principle). He almost certainly thought of “spirit” 
as being itself the substance that will compose the risen body. Our instinctive 
Cartesian dualism could not be more anachronistic here. Nor 
could the later clear distinction between the “natural” and the “supernatural.” 
Nor could our habitual failure to grasp the central opposition 
between the two distinct principles of soul and spirit—which 
runs through the entire New Testament’s anthropology, theology, and 
metaphysics—that Paul presumed. 

There is, admittedly, no single consistent account of resurrection— 
either Christ’s or ours—in the New Testament, but Paul’s language reflects 
the most prevalent. Only one verse, Luke 24:39, seems to advance 
a contrary picture; there, more or less reversing Paul’s terms, the risen 
Christ proves that he is not a spirit precisely by demonstrating that he 
possesses “flesh and bone.” But here, needless to say, the word “spirit” 
is being employed with its most debased and vulgar meaning, “ghost.” 
And even Luke, over the course of his two books, seems somewhat 
inconsistent on the terminology appropriate to resurrection (because, 
I suspect, he was drawing on diverse sources). There is, at the very 


least, ample scriptural evidence that Paul’s language in 1 Corinthians 
15 may be little more than a précis of a theology and metaphysics of 
resurrection not at all uncommon in many of the Jewish circles of his 
time. Certainly, his may have been one of the standard Pharisaic views 
of the matter. We almost unquestionably see evidence of this in Acts 

23:8: “For the Sadducees say there is no resurrection—neither as angel 
nor as spirit (μήτε ἄγγελον μήτε πνεῦμα, mēte a[n]ggelon mēte 
pnevma)—while the Pharisees profess both.” It seems quite clear from 
that phrase “neither as angel nor as spirit” that the concept of resurrection 
described here is, like Paul’s, that of an exchange of the “animated” 
or “psychical” body of this life for the sort of bodily existence 
proper to a “spirit” or an “angel.” Admittedly, some older translations 
rendered this passage as saying that the Sadducees believed neither in 
the resurrection, nor in spirits, nor in angels, but that is obviously not 
what the Greek means. Consider also Mark 12:25, Matthew 22:30, and 
Luke 20:35–36, all of which tell us that, for those who share in the resurrection, 
there is neither marrying nor being married—after all, there 
will no longer be either birth or (so notes Luke) death—because those 
who are raised will be “as the angels in heaven,” or “in the heavens,” and 
will in fact be “the angel’s equals” or “equivalent to angels” (ἰσάγγελοι, 
isa[n]ggeloi). It is difficult not to think that here Jesus may be telling 
the Sadducees that the theology of resurrection that he shares with the 
Pharisees claims not that the raised will enjoy merely a revived animated 
material body but rather that they will live forever in an angelic manner, 
an angelic frame. 
Nowhere in scripture, of course, is this fundamental opposition 
between flesh and spirit given fuller theological (and mystical) treatment 
than in John’s Gospel, and nowhere else is the promise that the 
saved will escape from a carnal into a spiritual condition more explicitly 
or repeatedly issued. The Logos of John’s Gospel does, of course, 
“become flesh” and “pitch a tent” among his creatures, but this involves 
no particular affirmation of the goodness of fleshly life; the Logos descends 
to us that we might ascend with him, and in so doing, presum



ably, shed the flesh (though not, one must emphasize, the body). This 
is the entire soteriological morphology of the Gospel, after all: the tale 
of the descent from above of the Father’s only Son—the Son who has 
come down from heaven and who can, therefore, go up to heaven again 
(3:13)—so that those who are born from above, of water and spirit, can 
see the Kingdom of God (3:3–5); “that which is born of flesh is flesh, 
and that which born of the spirit is spirit” (3:6). At the same time, of 
course, no other Gospel places greater emphasis upon the physical substantiality 
of the body of the risen Christ: Thomas invited to place his 
hands in Christ’s wounds, the disciples invited to share a breakfast of 
fish with him beside the Sea of Tiberias. This should not confuse us. It 
is another essentially modern, Cartesian prejudice that material bodies 
must by definition be more substantial, more concrete, more capable 
of generating physical effects than is anything that might be denominated 
as “soul” or “spirit” or “intellect.” But, in late Graeco-Roman 
antiquity, it made perfect sense to think of spiritual reality as more 
substantial, powerful, and resourceful than any animal body. Nothing 
of which a mortal, corruptible, “psychical” body is capable would have 
been thought to lie beyond the powers of an immortal, incorruptible, 
wholly spiritual being. It was this evanescent life, lived in a frail and 
perishable animal frame in the realm of generation and decay, that was 
regarded as the poorer, feebler, more ghostly of the two conditions; 
spiritual existence was something immeasurably mightier, more robust, 
more joyous, more plentifully alive. And this definitely seems to be 
the picture provided by the Gospels in general. The risen Christ, possessed 
of a spiritual body, could eat and drink, could be felt, could break 
bread between his hands; but he could also appear and disappear at will, 
unimpeded by walls or locked doors, or could become unrecognizable 
to those who had known him before his death, or could even ascend 
from the earth and pass through the incorruptible heavens where only 
spiritual beings may venture. 

And then, as I have also already mentioned in passing, there is 


1 Peter 3:18–19: “For the Anointed also suffered, once and for all, a just 
man on behalf of the unjust, so that he might lead you to God, being put 
to death in flesh and yet being made alive in spirit (θανατωθεὶς μὲν 
σαρκί, ζῳοποιηθεὶς δὲ πνεύματι, thanatōtheis men sarki, zōiopoiētheis 
de pnevmati), whereby (ἐν ᾧ, en hōi) he also journeyed and made a proclamation 
to the spirits in prison (τοῖς ἐν φυλακῇ πνεύμασιν, tois en 
phylakēi pnevmasin).” This verse is extremely easy to misconstrue. It is 
usually read as relating the same story found in 1 Peter 4:6, which seems 
to tell of Christ evangelizing the dead in Hades so that, though they 
had been judged “in flesh” according to human beings, they might live 
“in spirit” (not “in the Spirit”) according to God. While that verse too 
is germane to my remarks here, the verses from chapter three do not 
refer to the same episode. For one thing, whether or not the evangelization 
of Hades was understood as having occurred during the interval 
between Christ’s death and his resurrection, the tale cited in chapter 
three is explicitly about something Christ accomplished after his resurrection. 
The parallel construction “thanatōtheis men sarki, zōiopoiētheis de 
pnevmati” employs two modal datives—in or by or as flesh, in or by or as 
spirit—to indicate the manner or condition, first, of Christ’s death and, 
second, of his being made alive again, while the conjunctive formula 
en hōi seems to make it clear that, by being raised “as spirit,” Christ was 
made capable of entering into spiritual realms, and so of traveling to the 
“spirits in prison.” Again, the word here is “spirits,” meaning rational 
creatures who by their nature do not possess psychical bodies of perishable 
flesh; the reference is not to the “souls” of human beings who 
have died, but to those wicked angels or daemonic beings imprisoned in 
Tartarus until the day of judgment (mentioned also in 2 Peter 2:4–5 and 
Jude 1:6) whose stories are told in 1 Enoch and Jubilees. It may even be 
of some significance here that these infuriatingly enigmatic verses seem 
to echo the account of Enoch’s visit to the abode of these spirits in order 
to proclaim God’s condemnation upon them (1 Enoch 12–15). Who can 
say? It is certainly of considerable significance, however, that this pas



sage seems to say that the risen Christ was able to make his journey to 
those hidden regions precisely because he was no longer hindered by a 
carnal frame but instead now possessed the boundless liberty of spirit. 

It is just such liberty, incidentally, that for the New Testament appears 
to constitute a vital part of the substance of salvation. If we fail 
to notice this, it is only because, again, we still instinctively draw an 
absolute qualitative distinction between physical and spiritual reality, 
or between the natural and the supernatural. The authors of scripture 
inhabited a very different universe. For them, the eternal Son’s descent 
into this world was at once genuinely a movement from transcendence 
into immanence, but also a movement through space, down from the 
unchanging divine aeon, or realm above the heavens, through the concentric 
spheres of the planetary and lunar heavens, into the realm of 
generation, alteration, and decay. At the same time, our ascent to God 
in and through Christ is at once a sacramental, mystical, and gracious 
passage from death to new life, but also a path of ascent in and with 
Christ through the heavens into God’s eternity above. Both Christ and 
those saved by him traverse the spiritual and moral chasm of estrangement 
between God’s empyrean and this cosmos, but also (in some 
sense) the actual space between them. Or, at any rate, those intervening 
cosmic heavens, in the wake of Christ’s triumph over the hostile 
powers reigning in them and governing the world below, will no longer 
be barriers between God’s heaven and the world of the Age to come. It 
is hard for us to imagine in any but metaphorical colorations the great 
religious anxiety of late antiquity: that we are imprisoned in the “here 
below,” in the realm of transience, of birth and death, in the volatile 
region of air, under the impenetrable, turning, and sentineled spheres 
of the heavens above. Some of us may be aware that, in the early centuries 
of the church, there were mystery religions or “gnostic” sects or 
Orphic cults or Hermetic wisdoms (and so on) that promised salvation 
precisely in the form of escape from—and through the midst of—the 
hostile celestial agencies that imprison us here; but, even then, we tend 


to imagine that such beliefs were alien to Jewish or Christian faith. 
They were not. 

Most Jews, from well before to well after the time of Christ, as well 
as most Christians of those early centuries, thought of the cosmos and 
of salvation in just these terms. Hence the New Testament tells of a 
cosmic dispensation under the reign of the god of this aeon (2 Corinthians 
4:4) or the Archon of this cosmos (John 14:30; Ephesians 2:2), 
and of spiritual beings hopelessly immured within heavenly spheres 
thronged by hostile archons and powers and principalities and daemons 
(Romans 8:3, 39; 1 Corinthians 10:20–21; 15:24; Ephesians 1:21; 
and so on), bound under and cursed by a law that was in fact ordained 
by lesser, merely angelic powers (Galatians 3:10–11, 19–20). Into this 
prison, this darkness that knows nothing of the true light (John 1:5), 
a divine savior descends from the divine realm above (John 3:31; 8:23; 
and so on), perhaps veiled from the eyes of the hostile celestial powers 
by being in the “form” and “flesh” of a man (Romans 8:3; 1 Corinthians 
2:8; Philippians 2:7-8), bringing with him a secret truth that has 
been hidden from before the ages (Romans 16:25–26; Galatians 1:12; 
Ephesians 3:3–9; Colossians 1:26), a wisdom unknown even to “the archons 
of this cosmos” (1 Corinthians 2:7–8) that has the power to liberate 
fallen spirits (John 8:31–32, and so on). The letter to the Ephesians 
is practically a primer in this sort of cosmic soteriology: Christ has 
been seated at God’s right hand in the heavenly places, “far above every 
Rule and Authority and Power and Lordship” with “all things ordered 
under his feet” (Ephesians 1:20–22), having taken the hostile Powers 
captive as he ascended through the heavens (4:8–10); he has, moreover, 
emancipated us from the “Archon of the Power of the air” (2:2) and 
set us alongside himself in the heavenly places (2:6); and even now he 
is revealing God’s plan to these celestial Archons and Powers through 
his church (3:10); nevertheless, until the consummation of all things, 
Christians must continue to wrestle “not against blood and flesh, but 
against the Archons, against the Powers, against the Cosmic Rulers of 


this darkness, against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the celestial 
places” (6:12). The language is perfectly clear. Nor should we doubt for 
a moment how very literally these images were meant to be taken. This 
might seem to some of us today, of course, to reduce much of the soteriology 
of the New Testament to little more than naïve mythology or bad 
science, but that would be a thoroughly parochial judgment. Persons of 
every age are constrained to think and speak within the image of reality 
they know, but that does not mean that the truths they attempt to enunciate 
are exhausted by those conceptual forms. The language of salvation 
in Christ as it appears in the earliest Christian documents reflects 
the presuppositions of its time, but perhaps its revolutionary import 
has the power to shatter all presuppositions without losing its force. 
Its symbolic force may even long outlive the tacit (and, sadly, mechanistic) 
metaphysics and cosmology of reality that forms the dominant 
cosmic mythology of the modern age. Whatever the case, the fact remains 
that, for Paul (as for others of his time), Christ’s triumph over 
and subjugation of the cosmic Principalities and Authorities and Powers 
(1 Corinthians 15:24–28) has literally opened a path through the planetary 
spheres, the encompassing heavens, the armies of the air and the 
potentates on high, all the way to God. This is a claim made in intonations 
at once both physical and spiritual. And, even if now most of us 
can hear only the latter as having any genuinely compelling or credible 
force, we should nevertheless—just for understanding’s sake—let ourselves 
occasionally hear the former as well. We should, that is, let ourselves 
recognize the integral unity of the natural and the supernatural, 
the cosmic and the divine, in Paul’s joyous proclamation that “neither 
death nor life nor angels nor Archons nor things present nor things imminent 
nor Powers nor height nor depth nor any other creature will be 
able to separate us from the love of God” (Romans 8:38–39). 


